Decision Sciences
Volume 37 Number 4
November 2006

C(cid:2) 2006, The Author
Journal compilation C(cid:2) 2006, Decision Sciences Institute

RESEARCH NOTE

Bringing IT Back: An Analysis of the
Decision to Backsource or Switch Vendors

Dwayne Whitten†
Texas A&M University, Mailstop 4217, College Station, TX 77845,
e-mail: dwhitten@mays.tamu.edu

Dorothy Leidner
Baylor University, One Bear Place #98005, Waco, TX 76798,
e-mail: Dorothy Leidner@Baylor.edu

ABSTRACT

Whereas the decision to outsource information systems (IS) has been an important focus
in IS research and practice, the decision to switch vendors or to backsource has received
little attention. Evidence suggests that in practice, however, the decision to backsource
or to switch vendors is becoming increasingly common as ﬁrms vie for ways to continue
to cut information technology (IT) costs and improve IT service levels. This research
speciﬁcally examines the factors associated with the decision to backsource or to switch
vendors. Based on a sample of 160 IT managers involved with application development,
we compare and contrast the perceptions of those who switched vendors, backsourced,
or continued in an outsourcing relationship for application development. Our ﬁndings
suggest that product quality, service quality, relationship quality, and switching costs
are related to the decision to backsource application outsourcing. However, service and
product quality did not inﬂuence the decision to switch vendors. Rather, ﬁrms that made
the decision to switch vendors reported high levels of service and product quality but
low levels of relationship quality and switching costs.

Subject Areas: Backsourcing, Outsourcing, Product Quality, Relationship
Quality, Service Quality, and Switching Costs.

INTRODUCTION

Although the popularity of information technology (IT) outsourcing has grown
over the last two decades and was expected to be a larger than $206 billion in-
dustry in the United States alone in 2005 (Scardino, Brown, Caldwell, Cournoyer,
Dreyfus, Marriot, Maurer, & Young, 2004), many outsourcing arrangements do
not last. One study found that approximately a third of companies studied had
canceled outsourcing contracts (Lacity & Willcocks, 2001). Recently, some large
outsourcing failures have received wide attention. For example, JP Morgan Chase
& Co. ended its outsourcing relationship with IBM Corporation after only two
years of what was projected to be a seven-year, $5-billion arrangement. JP Morgan

†Corresponding author.

605

606

Bringing IT Back

Chase & Co. returned all IT functions back in house (Cowley, 2004). This practice
of bringing IT back in house following an outsourcing arrangement is referred to
as backsourcing. Lacity and Willcocks (2000) indicate that, of discontinued con-
tracts, 34% are backsourced. The technology research and consulting ﬁrm, Gartner
(Brown, 2004), reports that 56% of small-business and 42% of mid-sized-business
contracts are backsourced once the contract has been discontinued.

A major reason for bringing IT back in house is that top executives in highly
competitive IT-intensive industries are discovering that IT infrastructure is, in fact,
a competitive asset. Such was the case at JP Morgan Chase & Co. (Forelle, 2004).
Other reasons for backsourcing include poor service and price (Chalos & Sung,
1998; Ambrose, 2002) and a poor relationship between the vendor and the out-
sourcer (Dibbern, Goles, Hirschheim, & Jayatilaka, 2004). In spite of the many
reasons a ﬁrm might choose to backsource, transferring IT back in house is not
without cost and risk. Due to the return of employees, assets, and knowledge into
the ﬁrm, switching costs can be signiﬁcant. Gartner estimates that the cost of back-
sourcing is usually between 2% and 15% of the annual cost of a contract. Rather
than backsourcing, some ﬁrms might choose to switch vendors. However, the task
of switching vendors may also prove risky and expensive.

Outsourcing contracts run a gamut from total outsourcing, meaning outsourc-
ing of greater than 80% of the IT budget, to total insourcing, meaning outsourcing
of less than 20% of the IT budget, with the most common approach being selective
sourcing, meaning that an organization outsources anywhere between 20% and
80% of its IT budget (Lacity, Willcocks, & Feeny, 1996). Selective outsourcing
of IT has been shown to result in the highest and most successful outsourcing
arrangements (Lacity et al., 1996). Speciﬁcally, an organization might choose to
selectively outsource and subsequently to backsource desktop operations, network
operations, data center operations, and/or application development. We focus on
application development. Application development as an area of selective sourc-
ing has gained increasing attention as the phenomenon of offshore development
has increased (Kaiser & Hawk, 2004; Rottman & Lacity, 2004). The objective
of this research is to empirically examine the factors associated with switching
vendors, backsourcing, or continuing in an outsourcing relationship for application
development.

THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS

Transaction cost theory (TCT) and social exchange theory (SET) in combination
provide a theoretical lens through which to view the interaction of switching costs,
relationship quality, service quality, and product quality as they relate to the decision
an outsourcing client makes to either continue, backsource, or switch vendors. TCT
has been the theoretical basis for a number of outsourcing studies in IT (Aubert,
Rivard, & Patry, 2004; Lacity & Hirschheim, 1993) as well as in other areas such
as manufacturing (Balakrishnan, 1994; David & Han, 2004) and supply chain
management (Grover & Malhotra, 2003). This is largely because TCT focuses on
the economic motivation for entering and exiting interorganizational relationships.
In addition, TCT is applicable to a broad spectrum of research questions, because

Whitten and Leidner

607

any problem that can be thought of in terms of a contract can be investigated with
a transaction cost approach (Williamson, 1985).

While TCT is a prominent and useful theory to explain why ﬁrms initiate an
IT outsourcing arrangement (e.g., a presumably lower transaction cost to achieve
a given product/service quality level than if they retain control of the IT), TCT
alone cannot fully explain the subsequent decisions to continue or discontinue
an outsourcing relationship. TCT focuses primarily on the economic aspects of
relationships, but outsourcing decisions often involve fairly long-term relationships
during which time the perception of the relationship takes on increasing weight in
inﬂuencing satisfaction with the outsourcing arrangement. It is here that SET can
help offer supplemental explanations for why a client ﬁrm might backsource or
switch vendors, all else being equal. SET assumes that relationships are reviewed
and weighted in terms of costs and rewards, but not exclusively ﬁnancial aspects
(Thibaut & Kelley, 1959). The basis of SET is that parties involved in a relationship
recognize the value provided by each other and continue in the relationship because
the value created by the relationship is more attractive than alternatives (Blau,
1964). Over time, ﬁrms in a good relationship are likely to consider not only the
economic factors but also the social factors as important in the decision to continue
in the same relationship or not. Moreover, the quality of the relationship a ﬁrm
has with a vendor might be of considerable importance in cases where the ﬁrm is
considering switching vendors or backsourcing.

In summary, from TCT and SET, we posit that service quality and prod-
uct quality, as the objects of an outsourcing agreement, are important predictors
of a sustained outsourcing relationship. Moreover, relationship quality and the
switching costs will also inﬂuence the decision to continue with an outsourcing
agreement.

Hypotheses
Service quality is the conformance to customer requirements in the delivery of a
service (Parasuraman, Zeithaml, & Berry, 1988). It is a perceived judgment result-
ing from a comparison of client expectations with the level of service customers
perceive to have received from the outsourcing vendor. Service quality results in sig-
niﬁcant beneﬁts, such as proﬁt-level increases, cost savings, and increased market
share, to both entities involved in a transaction (Zeithaml, Berry, & Parasuraman,
1988) such as outsourcing. Outsourcing vendors assign considerable signiﬁcance
to service quality, as evidenced by some ﬁrms’ use of service quality to strategically
position themselves in the market (Parasuraman, Zeithaml, & Berry, 1988; Brown
& Swartz, 1989). Although the analysis of the correlation between service quality
and post hoc decisions is limited, service quality has been shown to affect purchase
intentions (Cronin & Taylor, 1992). The results of research conducted by Zeithaml,
Berry, and Parasuraman (1996) indicate a strong inﬂuence of service quality on
customers’ behavioral intentions, which was measured as the willingness of a client
to remain with the current vendor. In the context of outsourcing, service quality has
been shown to increase the success of the outsourcing relationship (McFarlan &
Nolan, 1995; Grover, Cheon, & Teng, 1996).

608

Bringing IT Back

Service quality is of particular importance from a transaction cost perspective,
because as the costs associated with monitoring the service level increase for the
client, the client is more likely to perceive the overall transaction cost as too high,
leading to a consideration of whether or not to continue the relationship. Moreover,
if the service provider acts opportunistically, as predicted by TCT, service quality
might decrease. For example, if the service provider diverts key people to other
projects or fails to adequately update related technology, then the service quality
might decrease for the client. As service quality decreases, the costs associated with
monitoring the service increase. Thus, the overall transaction costs increase and,
consequently, one would expect the client to consider alternatives. We therefore
propose:

H1a: Service quality will be negatively associated with backsourcing.
H1b: Service quality will be negatively associated with vendor switching.

Similarly, product quality is expected to inﬂuence the decision to backsource
or switch vendors. Opportunism on the part of the service provider can cause
product quality to decrease. If the service provider transfers experienced employees
to other projects (or devotes fewer employees), the service provider might fail to
make the types of continuous improvements expected by clients and, as a result,
the product quality might decrease relative to alternatives.

The product quality research has shown that performance, features, reliability,
conformance, durability, serviceability, aesthetics, and perceived quality contribute
to the perception of product quality in general (Garvin, 1984). Speciﬁcally related
to software product quality, research has traditionally emphasized reliability as
a primary indicator of quality (Shen, Yu, Thebaut, & Paulsen, 1985; Basili &
Perricone, 1984). Once software reliability has been achieved, however, the
focus then switches to other software product dimensions. Kekre, Krishnan,
and Srinivasan (1995) have used capability, usability, performance, installabil-
ity, maintainability, and documentation, in addition to reliability, as measures of
software product quality. Each of these factors was found to impact customer sat-
isfaction with the software product. Hence, we would expect product quality to
be negatively associated with the decision to end an outsourcing arrangement. We
therefore propose:

H2a: Product quality will be negatively associated with backsourcing.
H2b: Product quality will be negatively associated with vendor switching.

A third measure of quality, relationship quality, is also expected to inﬂuence
the decision to backsource or switch vendors. Trust, commitment, communication
quality, cultural similarity, and balanced interdependence all positively impact the
quality of a relationship (Dwyer, Schurr, & Oh, 1987; Anderson & Narus, 1990;
Mohr & Spekman, 1994; Morgan & Hunt, 1994; Kern, 1997). Moreover, relation-
ship quality and relationship success have been shown to be strongly connected
(Anderson et al., 1990; Mohr et al., 1994). Speciﬁcally related to IT outsourcing,
success has been shown to depend not only on a high level of service quality, but also
on other factors such as the relationship between the client and the vendor (Grover,
Cheon, & Teng, 1996; Kern, 1997; Lee & Kim, 1999; Lacity & Willcocks, 2000;
Koh, Ang, & Straub, 2004). From the perspective of SET, so long as the beneﬁts

Whitten and Leidner

609

of a relationship outweigh the costs (ﬁnancial and nonﬁnancial), there is no com-
pelling motivation to terminate the relationship. If, however, a client perceives that
the beneﬁts of the vendor come at too high a cost, then we would expect the client
to consider switching vendors or backsourcing. Conversely, if the quality of the
relationship is high, SET proposes the ﬁrms are less likely to terminate the rela-
tionship; rather, they will continue with the relationship due to the beneﬁts derived
from it. We therefore propose:

H3a: Relationship quality will be negatively associated with backsourcing.
H3b: Relationship quality will be negatively associated with vendor

switching.

Finally, switching costs (those associated with either moving service to an-
other vendor or bringing the outsourcing activities back in house) may play an
important role in terminating an outsourcing relationship. Research shows that
customers may be willing to stay in relationships in which they are dissatisﬁed
because of the presence of high switching costs (Morgan & Hunt, 1994; Willcocks
& Lacity, 1995). Dependency upon a service provider, caused by the lack of experi-
ence within a company or many other factors, can lead to relatively high switching
costs. Company decision makers can then believe they are locked into an outsourc-
ing relationship and feel unable to terminate the relationship without incurring
large switching costs. As further support of the signiﬁcance of switching costs,
it has been shown that, in environments where switching costs were not present,
customers reacted by switching vendors (Heide & Weiss, 1995). Both TCT and
SET shed light on the importance of switching costs. From the perspective of TCT,
there is a straightforward relationship between the transaction cost of outsourcing
to one ﬁrm versus outsourcing to another or backsourcing. If the total switching
cost combined with the anticipated transaction cost of a new arrangement (due to
switching or backsourcing) is relatively low, then the client ﬁrm would be expected
to act rationally and terminate the existing outsourcing relationship. From a SET
perspective, one might also consider the real as well as the perceived switching
costs. The perceived costs of switching would be inﬂuenced by factors such as
whether or not the client ﬁrm believes that the client can recreate as good as, or
better, a relationship with another ﬁrm; whether or not the client ﬁrm feels that
it is an important partner for the service provider; and whether or not the client
believes that the resources provided by the service provider are unique and difﬁcult
to replicate in the marketplace or in house. In short, one expects that switching
costs, actual or perceived, are negatively associated with the decision to end an
outsourcing arrangement. We thus propose:

H4a: Switching costs will be negatively associated with backsourcing.
H4b: Switching costs will be negatively associated with vendor switching.

METHODOLOGY

A survey methodology was employed using existing scales to measure service
quality, product quality, relationship quality, and switching costs, all on seven-
point scales. The measurement of service quality is based on the SERVQUAL

610

Bringing IT Back

instrument developed by Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry (1988) and introduced
in an information systems (IS) setting by Kettinger and Lee (1994). The items
chosen to measure relationship quality were taken from a general IT outsourcing
environment (Lee & Kim, 1999) and included items measuring ﬁve relationship
quality factors including trust, commitment, communication quality, cultural sim-
ilarity, and degree of interdependence. To measure product quality, we relied upon
a scale derived from previous research on the level of satisfaction with software
products (Kekre, Krishnan, & Srinivasan, 1995). The switching-cost scale devel-
oped for the current research was assembled with items from Weiss and Anderson
(1992) and from Jones, Mothersbaugh, and Beatty (2002). For the exact items used
to measure each construct or for a copy of the survey instrument, see Whitten
(2004).

Once the scale selection was complete, three versions of the instrument were
created to speciﬁcally collect data from ﬁrms that had experience with continu-
ing, backsourcing, or switching. The wording varied slightly to reﬂect the proper
environment. For example, one of the items for the backsourcers read (emphasis
added) “backsourcing required radical changes in the way we managed.” The same
item for switchers read, “switching vendors required radical changes in the way
we managed,” while the same item for the continuers read “switching to another
vendor or backsourcing would require radical changes in the way we manage.”

Sample
The sampling process began with the gathering of contact data from the Directory
of Top Computer Executives (Grover et al., 1996). The members were asked in the
cover letter to respond to each survey item in regard to an outsourcing relation-
ship in which they were involved in the past three years. A total of 160 responses
were received for a response rate of 26%. The respondents represented a range of
industries, including manufacturing, education, healthcare, and public administra-
tion. Roughly one third of the respondents had previously outsourced application
development before subsequently choosing to backsource roughly a quarter had
switched vendors during the course of an outsourcing contract, and the remaining
ﬁrms had continued with their application development outsourcing arrangements.
Table 1 summarizes the sample of respondents.

ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

Nonresponse Bias
Respondents were categorized by response time. Early responders were consid-
ered those whose instruments were received in the ﬁrst 25% of responses, while
late responders were those whose instruments were received in the last 25% of
responses. A comparison of the means of sample classiﬁcation variables and sum-
mary variables for the two groups was conducted using one-way analysis of vari-
ance (ANOVA). Variables used in the analysis included the numbers of employees
and IT employees in the organization, the number of years the organization has
practiced outsourcing, the number of previous outsourcing contracts the organiza-
tion has signed in the last ﬁve years, and the total dollar amount of the contracts. All

Whitten and Leidner

611

Table 1: Responses by outsourcing outcome.

Total number of survey responses
Average dollar amount of money

54
$16,929,000

36
$16,464,000

70
$16,868,000

Backsource

Switch

Continue

spent per year on IT
organizationwide

Number of years the organization has

11.88

practiced outsourcing

Number of years the vendor has
developed applications for the
responding company

Number of application development
outsourcing contracts signed
within the last ﬁve years

Percentage of the IT budget allocated
for application development and
maintenance that is currently
outsourced

12.00

2.00

10.14

5.61

8.53

6.66

2.76

5.53

14.55

34.51

27.69

Total dollar amount of the contract

$3,994,000

$7,569,000

$4,911,000

comparisons among groups returned insigniﬁcant differences. The insigniﬁcance
indicates that nonresponse bias has not impacted the data set.

Internal and External Validity
AMOS 4.0 was used to perform the factor analysis. Items for which factor scores
were less than .40 (Hair, Anderson, Tatham, & Black, 1998) or possessed correlated
error terms in the factor analysis were removed from further analysis following an
iterative process to reﬁne the scale (Joreskog, 1993). Altogether, 13 of 77 items
were removed. After these removals, the scales were assessed once again. The
individual item loadings indicated a strong correspondence between the observed
variables and their factors with all loadings at or above the .40 minimum (Hair et al.,
1998).

Three goodness-of-ﬁt indices (IFI, TLI, CFI) were used to determine the
ﬁt of the factor structure to the data. Goodness-of-ﬁt scores above the generally
accepted .90 threshold (Bentler, 1992) indicate an acceptable ﬁt of the model to the
data. Goodness-of-ﬁt measures are provided in Table 2. All of the indices, with the
exception of TLI (.89) for the switching costs scale, were above the .90 threshold.
Table 2 also shows the Cronbach’s alpha measure of reliability for each scale.
Consistent with traditional guidelines of scores greater than .7 being signiﬁcant
(Hair et al., 1998), all scales were determined to be reliable.

Both convergent and discriminant validity are considered subcategories of
construct validity. Convergent validity is supported by all of the highly signiﬁcant
loadings (p < .01) (Bagozzi, Yi, & Phillips, 1991) and the factor regression co-
efﬁcients (R2) being larger than .50 (Hildebrandt, 1987). Discriminant validity is
established when measures that should not be related actually do not relate. Dis-
criminant validity can be assessed by calculating the Average Variance Extracted
(AVE), which represents the amount of construct-related variance captured in

612

Bringing IT Back

RELATIONSHIP QUALITY

.95

.93

.95

Cronbach’s
alpha

AVE

TLI CFI

IFI

.97
.94

.95
.93

.96
.94

Table 2: Scale assessment.

Factors/dimensions

PRODUCT QUALITY
SERVICE QUALITY

Reliability
Responsiveness
Assurance
Empathy

Trust
Commitment
Culture
Communication
SWITCHING COSTS

Management system upgrade costs
Hiring and retraining costs
Uncertainty costs
Postswitching behavioral and cognitive costs
Lost performance costs
Setup costs
Search and evaluation costs
Sunk costs

.95

.85
.88
.87
.91

.88
.72
.82
.90

.79
.82
.79
.86
.87
.83
.95
.88

.91

.84
.92
.92
.89

.89
.83
.73
.90

.068
.83
.53
.64
.77
.74
.86
.85

.91

.89

.91

Table 3: Mean responses from Scheff´e results (subset for alpha = .05).

Decision

Backsource
Switch
Continue

Product
quality

3.92
4.86
5.45

Relationship
quality

4.42
4.12
5.32

Service
quality

4.21
5.01
5.26

Switching
costs

3.15
3.46
4.45

relation to error variance. The average percentage of variance extracted for each
construct should be higher than .50 (Hair et al., 1998). This implies that the vari-
ance accounted for by each construct is greater than the variance accounted for by
measurement error (Hair et al., 1998). The AVE for all measures exceed .50 (Table
2), providing evidence of discriminative validity of the measures.

ANOVA and Scheff´e’s Test
An ANOVA, signiﬁcant at the .01 level, veriﬁed that differences exist among re-
sponses between the three groups (those who backsourced, switched, and con-
tinued). Scheff´e’s post hoc test was then used to investigate all speciﬁc mean
differences between groups (Hair et al., 1998). Table 3 displays the results from
multiple comparisons between groups.

Whitten and Leidner

Table 4: A comparison of backsourcers, switchers, and continuers.

Product
quality

High
Low
High

Relationship
quality

High
Low
Low

Service
quality

High
Low
High

Continuers
Backsourcers
Switchers

613

Switching
costs

High
Low
Low

Table 4 summarizes the results from the various Scheff´e’s tests. Product-
quality levels for the continuers and switchers are high relative to the low levels of
backsourcers. This indicates that the mean response to product-quality questions
for those who continued and those who switched were not signiﬁcantly different
from each other, while at the same time both responses were signiﬁcantly different
than the responses from those who backsourced. In this case, the high and low
designations were derived from the relative mean scores of the groups (Table 3).

Testing of Hypotheses 1a, 2a, 3a, 4a
To test our hypotheses concerning backsourcing, we compared the backsourcers
to the continuers across the four dimensions. According to our data, ﬁrms that
continued with their applications-development outsourcing relationships experi-
enced what they perceived as high levels of product quality, relationship quality,
and service quality and also perceived a high cost of switching vendors. The con-
trast in perceptions between backsourcers and continuers is stark. Firms that chose
to backsource their application development experienced lower levels of all three
quality metrics as well as switching costs. These differences on all four dimensions
between continuers and backsourcers were highly signiﬁcant. In terms of service
quality, the mean for backsourcers was 4.21, whereas the mean for continuers was
5.26. The difference (1.05) is signiﬁcant at the .05 level, lending support to Hypoth-
esis 1a. In terms of product quality, the mean for backsourcers was 3.92, whereas
the mean for continuers was 5.45. The difference (1.53) is signiﬁcant at the .05
level, lending support to Hypothesis 2a. With regard to relationship quality, the
mean response for backsourcers was 4.42, while the mean response for continuers
was 5.32. Hypothesis 3a is thus supported by the difference of .90 between the
two groups being signiﬁcant (α = .05). With regard to switching costs, the mean
response for backsourcers was 3.15, while the mean response for continuers was
4.45. Hypothesis 4a is therefore supported by the difference of 1.30 between the
two groups being signiﬁcant (α = .05). Mean values for these comparisons are
shown in Table 3.

Perhaps the least obvious of the results is that of switching costs. Should not
the switching costs be the same regardless of whether or not the client is satisﬁed
with the quality of the product, service, and relationship? Evidently it is not; rather,
it appears that the softer elements associated with switching costs weigh in as
important as the ﬁnancial elements such that ﬁrms satisﬁed with the quality of
their outsourcing arrangements perceive greater switching costs than ﬁrms that are
not satisﬁed.

614

Bringing IT Back

Testing of Hypotheses 1b, 2b, 3b, and 4b
When looking at the ﬁrms that chose to switch vendors, it is interesting to note that
they rated the product and service quality as high, like the ﬁrms that continued in an
outsourcing arrangement, but the relationship quality as low. Mean responses for
product quality were 4.86 and 5.45 for switchers and continuers, respectively, while
service-quality responses were 5.01 and 5.26, respectively. These scores were not
signiﬁcantly different. Relationship-quality responses were 4.12 for the switchers
and 5.32 for the continuers. The difference of 1.20 is signiﬁcant at the .001 level.
We thus have support for Hypothesis 3b, but not for Hypotheses 1b or 2b. One
might assume that, if a ﬁrm is satisﬁed with the product and service, that one is
satisﬁed with the relationship, but this does not appear to be the case. Companies
that switched vendors did so in spite of rating the product and service-quality levels
as high as the continuers.

Moreover, given that, of the three groups, the switchers had the highest aver-
age dollar-value contract and the highest percentage of the IT budget outsourced
(see Table 1), one might expect them to perceive the highest switching costs. Such
is also not the case. Switchers perceived a signiﬁcantly lower switching cost than
continuers, as shown by their mean responses of 3.46 and 4.45, respectively. The
difference of .99 indicates a signiﬁcance difference at the .001 level, thus support-
ing Hypothesis 4b and suggesting that it is the relationship quality more than the
product or service quality that inﬂuences perceptions of switching costs.

DISCUSSION

Past research has indicated that economic and social contributions help to sustain
exchange relationships (Gassenheimer, Houston, & Davis, 1998). When parties in
a relationship are satisﬁed with the amount of economic and social investments and
returns, they generally maintain these relationships (Mohr et al., 1994). Although
TCT supposes that the primary motivations behind sustaining or terminating an
exchange relationship are economic factors (Williamson, 1991), SET concedes that
emotional costs and beneﬁts are intrinsic to economically motivated relationships
(Kumar, Scheer, & Steenkamp, 1995). This article helps to demonstrate why it is
important to consider both theories in tandem rather than separately. While both
theories can help elucidate why a ﬁrm might consider discontinuing an outsourcing
relationship, neither theory itself can explain why a ﬁrm decides to backsource
as opposed to switch vendors. This study helps explain the differences in the
backsourcing and vendor-switching decisions.

It is clear that service and product quality had little inﬂuence on the survey
respondents’ decision to switch vendors. To the contrary, ﬁrms that chose to switch
vendors reported almost as high levels of service quality on all four dimensions—
reliability, responsiveness, assurance, and empathy—as the ﬁrms that continued
to outsource with their existing vendor, and they reported almost as high a level
of product quality. However, relationship quality plays an important role in the
decision to switch vendors. Of our three groups, those that switched vendors had
the lowest perceptions of trust, commitment, culture, and communication in relation

Whitten and Leidner

615

to their vendors. It is particularly worth noting that, in spite of having a high rating
on product quality and a high rating on service quality, ﬁrms that switched vendors
maintained a relatively low level of trust in their existing vendors, even lower than
the backsourcers for whom the service and product quality perceptions were low.
Hence, the building of trust between an outsourcer and a ﬁrm is far more a socio-
emotional condition than it is a matter of providing an excellent product and/or
service.

Contrarily, the decision to backsource is heavily inﬂuenced by service and
product quality in addition to relationship quality. For ﬁrms that made the decision
to backsource, the product quality and the service quality on all four dimensions
was signiﬁcantly lower than reported by ﬁrms that switched or continued to out-
source with a given vendor. As a result, it appears that the signiﬁcance in perceived
product and service quality lies in helping ﬁrms maintain trust in the suitability of
outsourcing rather than trust in a particular vendor. Firms experiencing poor ser-
vice and poor product quality are more likely to backsource than to switch vendors.
Where service and product quality are high but other dimensions unacceptable, a
ﬁrm is more likely to switch vendors than to backsource, in part because it has
experienced strong vendor service even when dissatisﬁed with the outsourcing
relationship as a whole.

Switching costs exert similar inﬂuences on the backsourcing and vendor
switching decision. In general, both switchers and backsourcers perceive switching
costs to be signiﬁcantly lower than do continuers, despite the fact that we did
not ask questions concerning the soft costs associated with developing a trusting
relationship with a new vendor. Moreover, switchers and backsourcers perceived
roughly equivalent switching costs, implying that the switching costs are the same
whether one chooses to outsource with another vendor or whether one chooses to
backsource. However, there is an interesting difference between the two groups in
terms of switching costs related to the speciﬁc variable, setup costs. In this case,
the setup costs perceived by backsourcers were signiﬁcantly lower than the setup
costs perceived by switchers. One might conjecture that, because switchers were
satisﬁed with the product and service qualities of their existing relationships, for
them to set up equivalent products and service levels is perceived to be more costly
than for backsourcers who did not have to live up to a high level of product and
service quality expectations on the part of users.

From a vendor perspective, it appears that investments made to improve
service, relationship, and product quality could help to sustain the outsourcing
relationship. As the quality in these areas increases, customers are more likely to
continue in the relationship. Also, assuming vendor investments increase service,
relationship, and product quality, the switching costs should rise in parallel as the
client realizes it will cost them more to obtain similar service from another vendor or
in-house staff. Conversely, if the service, relationship, and product quality decrease,
the switching costs should decrease, resulting in a situation in which the client
is likely to backsource or switch vendors. Thus, there is a relationship among
service, relationship, and product quality, and the switching costs, and vendors
should be aware of the direct effect these quality measures could have on contract
continuation.

616

Bringing IT Back

Future Research
This article has sought to uncover the differences in experiences of backsourcers,
compared to vendor switchers and to ﬁrms that continue in outsourcing relation-
ships, across four constructs that have been proven important in previous outsourc-
ing research: service quality, relationship quality, product quality, and switching
costs. Whereas prior empirical research into outsourcing has predominantly relied
upon satisfaction as a measure of outsourcing success (Dibbern, Goles, Hirschheim,
& Jayatilaka, 2004), our research explores the actual decision to continue (or not)
the outsourcing relationship as the success measure. This has helped us uncover
some novel ﬁndings related to backsourcing and vendor switching. Of note is the
signiﬁcance of relationship quality to the decision to discontinue an outsourcing
arrangement. Future research could employ relationship theory, or theories of so-
cial exchange, to learn how vendors and outsourcing clients can better manage
their relationship, particularly given that service quality and product quality alone
are insufﬁcient to motivate an outsourcing ﬁrm to continue its relationship with a
vendor.

Another fruitful avenue of future research would be to investigate the factors
that inﬂuence switching costs. Given that our vendor switchers had higher real
costs than our backsourcers and continuers, it is unexpected that their perceived
switching costs would actually be lower than those of ﬁrms that continued in their
outsourcing arrangement. This suggests that there are psychological elements at
play in the assessment of switching costs. Helping ﬁrms understand their real,
versus perceived, switching costs, would be a valuable research objective.

The ﬁndings in this research are based on empirical results obtained from
executives with actual experience with not only successful outsourcing, but also
with backsourcing and switching. Further work in this area is needed to investigate
more completely the backsourcing and switching phenomena. Other factors such as
level of application complexity, goal conﬂict, and risk could be helpful in explaining
the phenomena more completely and should be considered for inclusion in follow-
up studies.

Further research is also recommended to extend this research model into the
broader IT outsourcing market, IT in general, and even outside of IT. For example,
research could apply this model not only to other outsourcing settings, but also to
IT services, such as procurement, or to areas outside of IT, such as manufacturing.
Product manufacturing is likely to be impacted by the same types of issues as
application development, as evidenced by the quantity of research in operations
and manufacturing utilizing TCT (Grover & Malhotra, 2003; McNally & Grifﬁn,
2004).

Limitations
This study was solely limited to application outsourcing. Factors impacting the de-
cision to backsource or switch vendors in desktop operations, network operations,
and data center operations could be different than in application backsourcing.
Therefore, an extension of this research might examine the inﬂuence these factors
have in various types of outsourcing. Another limitation concerns the categorical
nature of the dependent variable of interest. This limited the data analysis options

Whitten and Leidner

617

available. Although we believed, similar to Teng, Cheon, and Grover (1995), that
this ex-post-facto method has its own merits, future research in this area should
consider utilizing a Likert-type scale, as opposed to a three-category classiﬁcation.
This would allow an expanded number of quantitative analysis methods that could
offer a richer investigation. However, with a Likert scale, one would be limited to
questioning ﬁrms concerning their intention (on a scale) to backsource or switch
vendors, rather than whether or not they actually did backsource or switch vendors.
This would pose a different set of limitations.

CONCLUSIONS

The IT outsourcing phenomenon is considered to be about 15 years old, dating back
to the ﬁrst major contract announcement between Eastman Kodak and IBM in 1989
(Dibbern et al., 2004). Recent research into outsourcing has suggested that many
organizations have begun to renegotiate or terminate contracts with outsourcing
partners, choosing instead to backsource or switch vendors (Overby, 2003). Dibbern
et al. (2004) suggest that backsourcing might become a key area in the outsourcing
arena in coming years. In spite of these indications that backsourcing may be on
the rise, little empirical research exists that helps elucidate and understand the
backsourcing decision, and at the same time a lack of research related to vendor
switching is also evident. This article is among the ﬁrst that provides empirical data
concerning the backsourcing and switching phenomena. We have presented data
comparing ﬁrms that backsourced or switched vendors to ﬁrms that continued in
an outsourcing relationship for application development. The results indicate that
product quality, service quality, relationship quality, and switching costs are related
to the decision to backsource application outsourcing, with product quality and
service quality being the differentiators in deciding whether a client will backsource
or switch. Understanding these factors is the critical ﬁrst step to understanding
application backsourcing and vendor switching. [Received: May 2006. Accepted:
September 2006.]

REFERENCES

Ambrose, C. (2002). Sourcing deals can’t ﬁx themselves: Know your options.

Gartner, Document code # COM-15-2692.

Anderson, J., & Narus, J. (1990). A model of distributor ﬁrm and manufacturer

ﬁrm working relationships. Journal of Marketing, 54(1), 42–58.

Aubert, B., Rivard, S., & Patry, M. (2004). A transaction cost model of IT out-

sourcing. Information & Management, 41, 921–934.

Bagozzi, R. P., Yi, Y., & Phillips, L. W. (1991). Assessing construct validity in
organizational research. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36, 421–458.

Balakrishnan, S. (1994). The dynamics of make or buy decisions. European Journal

of Operational Research, 74, 552–571.

Basili, V., & Perricone, B. (1984). Software errors and complexity: An empirical

investigation. Communications of the ACM, 27(1), 42–52.

618

Bringing IT Back

Bentler, P. M. (1992). On the ﬁt of models to covariances and methodology to the

bulletin. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 400–404.

Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: Wiley.

Brown, R. (2004). User survey: SMB business process outsourcing, North America,

2004. Gartner, Document code # G00124462.

Brown, S., & Swartz, T. (1989). A gap analysis of professional service quality.

Journal of Marketing, 53(2), 92–98.

Chalos, P., & Sung, J. (1998). Outsourcing decisions and managerial incentives.

Decision Sciences, 29, 901–919.

Cowley, S. (2004). J.P. Morgan scraps $5B IT deal with IBM. Computerworld,

38(38), 1–16.

Cronin, J. J., Jr., & Taylor, S. A. (1992). Measuring service quality: A reexamination

and extension. Journal of Marketing, 56(3), 55–68.

David, R., & Han, S. (2004). A systematic assessment of the empirical support for

transaction cost economics. Strategic Management Journal, 25(1), 39–58.

Dibbern, J., Goles, T., Hirschheim, R., & Jayatilaka, B. (2004). Information systems
outsourcing: A survey and analysis of the literature. DATABASE for Advances
in Information Systems, 35(4), 6–102.

Dwyer, F. R., Schurr, P. H., & Oh, S.(1987). Developing buyer-seller relationships.

Journal of Marketing, 51(2), 11–27.

Forelle, C. (2004). JP Morgan ends accord with IBM: Technology will return to
being done in-house; Pact has $5 billion value. Wall Street Journal, September
16, A3.

Garvin, D. A. (1984). What does “product quality” really mean? Sloan Management

Review, 26(1), 25–43.

Gassenheimer, J., Houston, F., & Davis, J. (1998). The role of economic value,
social value, and perceptions of fairness in interorganizational relationship
retention decisions. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 26, 322–
337.

Kumar, N., Scheer, L., & Steenkamp, J. (1995). The effects of perceived inter-
dependence on dealer attitudes. Journal of Marketing Research, 32, 348–
357.

Grover, V., Cheon, M. J., & Teng, J. (1996). The effect of service quality and
partnership on the outsourcing of information systems functions. Journal of
Management Information Systems, 12(4), 89–116.

Grover, V., & Malhotra, M. (2003). Transaction cost framework in operations and
supply chain management research: Theory and measurement. Journal of
Operations Management, 21, 457–473.

Hair, J. F., Jr., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L., & Black, W. C. (1998). Multivariate

data analysis with readings. New York: Macmillan.

Heide, J., & Weiss, A. (1995). Vendor consideration and switching behavior for
buyers in high-technology markets. Journal of Marketing, 59(3), 30–43.

Whitten and Leidner

619

Hildebrandt, L. (1987). Consumer retail satisfaction in rural areas: A reanalysis of

survey data. Journal of Economic Psychology, 8(1), 19–42.

Jones, M., Mothersbaugh, D., & Beatty, S. (2002). Why customers stay: Measuring
the underlying dimensions of services switching costs and managing their
differential strategic outcomes. Journal of Business Research, 55, 441–450.

Joreskog, K. (1993). Factor analysis by least-squares and maximum-likelihood
methods. In K. Enslein, A. Ralston, & J. Wilf (Eds.), Statistical methods for
digital computers. New York: Wiley, 125–153.

Kaiser, K., & Hawk, S. (2004). Evolution of offshore software development: From

outsourcing to cosourcing. MIS Quarterly Executive, 3(2), 69–81.

Kekre, S., Krishnan, M., & Srinivasan, K. (1995). Drivers of customer satisfaction
for software products: Implications for design and service support. Manage-
ment Science, 41, 1456–1470.

Kern, T. (1997). The gestalt of an information technology outsourcing relation-
ship: An exploratory analysis. Proceedings of the Eighteenth International
Conference on Information Systems, Atlanta, GA, 37–58.

Kettinger, W., & Lee, C. (1994). Perceived service quality and user satisfaction
with the information services function. Decision Sciences, 25, 737–766.

Koh, C., Ang, S., & Straub, D. (2004). IT outsourcing success: A psychological

contract perspective. Information Systems Research, 15, 356–373.

Lacity, M., & Hirschheim, R. (1993). The information systems outsourcing band-
wagon: Look before you leap. Sloan Management Review, 35(1), 72–86.

Lacity, M., & Willcocks, L. (2000). Relationships in IT outsourcing: A stakeholder
perspective. In R. Zmud (Ed.), Framing the domains of IT management:
Projecting the future through the past. Cincinnati, OH: Pinnaﬂex, 355–384.

Lacity, M., & Willcocks, L. (2001). Global information technology outsourcing:
In search of business advantage (1st ed.). West Sussex, England: Wiley.

Lacity, M., Willcocks, L., & Feeny, D. (1996). The value of selective IT sourcing.

Sloan Management Review, 37(3), 13–25.

Lee, J. N., & Kim, Y. G. (1999). Effect of partnership quality on IS outsourcing
success: Conceptual framework and empirical validation. Journal of Man-
agement Information Systems, 15(4), 29–61.

McFarlan, W., & Nolan, R. (1995). How to manage an IT outsourcing alliance.

Sloan Management Review, 36(2), 9–23.

McNally, R., & Grifﬁn, A. (2004). Firm and individual choice drivers in make-
or-buy decisions: A diminishing role for transaction cost economics? The
Journal of Supply Chain Management, 40(1), 4–17.

Mohr, J., & Spekman, R. (1994). Characteristics of partnership success: Partner-
ship attributes, communication behavior, and conﬂict resolution techniques.
Strategic Management Journal, 15(2), 135–152.

Morgan, R., & Hunt, S. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of relationship mar-

keting. Journal of Marketing, 58(3), 20–38.

620

Bringing IT Back

Overby, S. (2003). Bringing IT back home. CIO, 16(10), 1.

Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V. A., & Berry, L. L. (1988). SERVQUAL: A multiple-
item scale for measuring consumer perceptions of service quality. Journal of
Retailing, 64(1), 12–40.

Rottman, J., & Lacity, M. (2004). Twenty practices for offshore outsourcing. MIS

Quarterly Executive, 3(3), 117–130.

Scardino, L., Brown, R., Caldwell, B., Cournoyer, S., Dreyfus, C., Marriot, I.,
Maurer, W., & Young, A. (2004). Gartner on outsourcing, 4q04. Gartner
Group, Paper #G00125258.

Shen, V., Yu, T.-J., Thebaut, S., & Paulsen, L. (1985). Identifying error-prone
software: An empirical study. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
11, 317–324.

Teng, J., Cheon, M., & Grover, V. (1995). Decisions to outsource information
systems functions: Testing a strategy-theoretic discrepancy model. Decision
Sciences, 26, 75–103.

Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. New York:

Wiley.

Weiss, A., & Anderson, E. (1992). Converting from independent to employee
salesforces: The role of perceived switching costs. Journal of Marketing
Research, 29(1), 101–115.

Whitten, D. (2004). The application development outsourcing contract decision:
The effect of service quality, relationship quality, satisfaction, and switching
costs on continuation and discontinuation decisions. Doctoral dissertation,
Louisiana Tech University, Ruston, LA.

Willcocks, L., & Lacity, M. (1995). Information systems outsourcing in theory and

practice. Journal of Information Technology, 10(4), 203–207.

Williamson, O. E. (1985). The economic institutions of capitalism: Firms, markets,

relational contracting. New York: Free Press.

Williamson, O. E. (1991). Comparative economic organization: The analysis of
discrete structural alternatives. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36(2), 269–
296.

Zeithaml, V. A., Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1988). Communication and
control processes in the delivery of service quality. Journal of Marketing,
52(2), 35–48.

Zeithaml, V. A., Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1996). The behavioral conse-

quences of service quality. Journal of Marketing, 60(2), 31–46.

Dwayne Whitten is assistant clinical professor of information systems in the Mays
Business School at Texas A&M University. His main research interests include IT
outsourcing, IT governance, switching costs, and IT security. He has published in
several business and information systems related journals including the Harvard
Business Review, European Journal of Information Systems, Journal of Strategic

Whitten and Leidner

621

Information Systems, Communications of the AIS, Journal of Organizational and
End User Computing, Journal of Computer Information Systems, and Industrial
Management and Data Systems.

Dorothy E. Leidner is the Randall W. and Sandra Ferguson Professor of Informa-
tion Systems at Baylor University. She previously served as an associate professor
at INSEAD and an associate professor at Texas Christian University. She has also
been a visiting professor at the University of Mannheim in Germany, at Monterrey
Tech University in Mexico, at the University of Caen, France, and at Southern
Methodist University. Dr. Leidner received her PhD in information systems from
the University of Texas at Austin. Her research has been published in a variety of
journals, such as MIS Quarterly, Information Systems Research, Journal of Man-
agement Information Systems, and Organization Science. She received best paper
awards in 1993 from the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, in
1995 from MIS Quarterly, and in 1999 from the Academy of Management OCIS
division. Dr. Leidner is currently serving as Associate Editor for Decision Sciences
and Senior Editor for MIS Quarterly.

