Received February 5, 2019, accepted February 22, 2019, date of publication March 11, 2019, date of current version March 25, 2019.

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2903450

CCRO: Citation’s Context & Reasons Ontology

IMRAN IHSAN AND MUHAMMAD ABDUL QADIR (Member, IEEE)
Center for Research in Data Science, Semantics and Scientometrics, Department of Computer Science,
Capital University of Science and Technology, Islamabad 45750, Pakistan

Corresponding author: Imran Ihsan (iimranihsan@gmail.com)

ABSTRACT Research papers can be visualized as a networked information space that contains a collection
of information entities, inter-connected by directed links, commonly known as citation graph. There is a
possibility to enrich the citation graph with meaningful relations using semantic tags. We have discovered
and evaluated more than 150 citations’ reasons from the existing published literature to be represented as
citation tags. Many of these reasons have overlapped and diffused meanings. Annotating such a large volume
of citation graphs with citation’s reasons manually is nearly impossible, giving rise to a need to discover the
citation’s reasons automatically with high accuracy. The ﬁrst step towards this is developing a minimal
set of citation’s context and reasons that are disjoint in nature. It would be a great help to the reasoning
system if these reasons are represented in a formal way in the form of an ontology. By adopting a well-
deﬁned scientiﬁc methodology to formulate an ontology of citation reasons, we have reduced 150 reasons
into only eight disjoint reasons, using an iterative process of sentiment analysis, collaborative meanings, and
experts’ opinions. Based on our ﬁndings and experiments, we have proposed a citation’s context and reasons
ontology (CCRO) that provides abstract conceptualization required to organize citations’ relations. CCRO
has been veriﬁed, validated, and assessed by using the well-deﬁned procedures and tools proposed in the
literature for ontology evaluation. The results show that the proposed ontology is concise, complete, and
consistent. For the instantiation and mapping of ontology classes on real data, we have developed a mapping
graph among the verbs with predicative complements in the English Language, the verbs extracted from
the selected corpus using the NLP and CCRO classes. Using this mapping graph, the mapping of ontology
classes in each citation’s sentiment is explained with a complete mapping on the selected dataset.

INDEX TERMS Citation ontology, citation graphs, citation analysis, ontology development, natural lan-
guage processing, computational linguistics.

I. INTRODUCTION
Network of Scientiﬁc Literature contains collection of infor-
mation entities (research papers) inter-connected by a link
structure. The link between research papers is deﬁned as
‘Citation’ and this inter-connected network is known as ‘Cita-
tion Graph’. In this graph representation, each paper becomes
the node and their citation link becomes the edge between the
nodes; the edge implies that the paper associated to the ﬁrst
node is cited by the paper at the other node (past to present in
time domain), thus making a directed acyclic graph (DAG).
The citation graph may contain valuable information regard-
ing how a scholarly activity has evolved during its lifecycle.
Today’s citation graph mainly uses these citation links with-
out showing any cognitive relationship between the nodes.

The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and

approving it for publication was Samee Khan.

Various researchers have deﬁned different parameters to
ﬁnd relations among research papers. These parameters
include keywords, title, authors, references, citations, con-
tents etc. ‘‘Citation Analysis’’ is the study of citations and
deals with the nature of citations and the relationship between
the citing and the cited paper. There can be various context
and reasons as to why an author chooses to cite another
paper. Citations are different from references. A reference
refers to the work mentioned in bibliography. A reference
may be mentioned once or multiple times in an article. Each
mention is known as citation and there can be two different
context and reasons to cite the same reference. Using these
context and reasons, there is a possibility to enrich citation
graph with meaningful relations. Garﬁeld [1] identiﬁed 15
reasons for citing references in his study and provided a valid
indication about the importance of citation and importance of
the nature of citation. These citation relations are not merely

VOLUME 7, 2019

2169-3536 
 2019 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only.
Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

30423

dumb links, as they can be annotated with semantic tags that
are required to be identiﬁed, extracted, evaluated, visualized
and preserved.

Currently, citation analysis techniques mainly deal with
citation-counts. These techniques have matured towards a
serious means to assess impact of a scholarly work, their
applications have given rise to the criticism about the qual-
ity of simple counts [2]. Many researchers have performed
experiments to examine the citation context for a deeper
insight into the scientiﬁc knowledge instead of simple counts
and have listed different reasons for citations. A detailed
study reveals that there are more than 150 reasons mentioned
in the literature to deﬁne a citation relationship among the
articles.

According to a study to estimate the size of data need to
be processed for citation graph in 2014 [3], there are over
45 Million research papers in Microsoft Academic Research,
over 55 Million in Web of Science and over 100 Million
in Google Scholar. Annotating each citation in such a large
volume citation data in one of the possible 150 reasons is
nearly impossible. Moreover, the collected citation’s reasons
have overlapped and diffused meanings. Discovering these
citation’s reasons using machine algorithms will also result
in very low accuracy. Thus, giving rise to a need to discover
the citation’s reasons automatically. To achieve this goal, ﬁrst
step is to develop a minimal set of citation’s context and
reasons that are disjoint in nature (if possible) and represent
them in a formal way in the form of Ontology. A disjoint and
formally deﬁned set of citation’s reasons can make machine
algorithms and automated reasoners to identify these cita-
tion’s reasons with high accuracy.

Using OWL2 ontologies [4], it is now possible to encode
bibliographic and citation data, document components and
nature of individual citations into formal and machine-
interpretable form. There have been many experiments and
researches to encode various components of a scientiﬁc paper
in a formal way including citations using ontologies. One of
such efforts is SPAR (Semantic Publishing and Referencing)
Ontologies. SPAR contains variety of different ontologies.
One of the most relevant ontology to our research, was devel-
oped by Peroni and Shotton [5] and was introduced as CiTO,
an ontology to assert and characterize bibliographic reference
and citations. CiTO describes 41 properties, termed as T41,
to deﬁne and annotate a citation with its reasons. Annotating
41 properties requires a huge cognitive effort, therefore, there
is a need of a smaller set of properties to make it more
effective.

Although a lot of research has been going on in gen-
eral analysis of entities, the research to ﬁnd relationship
between them is not that common. Amit Sheth and his fel-
low researchers [13] believe that abstract conceptualization
of these relationships can beneﬁt several applications in
the area of natural language processing, information extrac-
tion, machine learning and ontology engineering. In their
paper, they have used the conceptual hierarchy that exits in
English language verbs and categorized them in fundamental

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

concepts based on their shared meaning and syntactic behav-
ior to form an ontology, titled as ‘CEVO - a Comprehensive
EVent Ontology’. Using this concept, we have adopted a well-
deﬁned scientiﬁc methodology to formulate an ontology for
citation’s context and reasons. Initially, we have performed
a survey to discover and list all possible citation’s context
and reasons deﬁned by various authors over the last 50 years.
Using an iterative process of sentiment analysis, collaborative
meanings and experts’ opinions, a minimal but comprehen-
sive set of citation reasons has been formulated. Each reason
in the set deﬁnes a unique citation link between research
papers in a citation graph. This minimal set of reasons deﬁnes
Citation’s Context and Reasons Ontology (CCRO) classes.
Using Stanford linguistic Levin’s [6] inventory of English
verbs and knowledge base, a mapping between the verbs used
in a citation text by the author and the CCRO Classes pro-
vides a high-level abstraction by deﬁning sets of semantically
coherent verbs that correspond to the syntactic properties of
each class.

Paper Organization: Section II evaluates the existing
ontologies to formally deﬁne citations and their possible
drawbacks. Section III outlines a well-deﬁned methodology
adopted to propose ontology that is ‘CCRO’ and its instantia-
tion and mapping on real data. Section IV describes the exper-
iments performed to develop ontology. Based on the results,
section V deﬁnes a high-level abstraction for the proposed
ontology at schema and instance level. Section VI evaluates
the proposed ontology using automated tools and user study.
Section VII describes experiments performed for ontology
instantiation and Section VIII deﬁnes the mapping of pro-
posed ontology on citation text with ‘Positive’, ‘Negative’
and ‘Neutral’ sentiment and its complete mapping on real
data. Section IX explains future directions and discussions.
Section X concludes the paper.

II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Automated processing of bibliographic and citations’ data
requires machine-interpretable metadata for publications and
citations while the ontologies are required to encode these
metadata elements. Semantic Publishing requires a lot more
than just making the metadata available [5]. Some of the areas
that require research are:

1. Development and adoption of semantic models (ontolo-
gies) that permits bibliographic and citation data in
machine-interpretable form, is the core requirement in
scholarly authoring and publishing.

2. Development of annotation tools to help the authors
to enhance their documents using appropriate semantic
assertions.

Semantic based publishing applications provide cus-
tomization of data and the content to reﬂect the user’s needs
of retrieval of relevant data with minimal effort. Using the
new set of OWL2 ontologies [4], bibliographic and citation
data, document components and nature of individual cita-
tions can be structured. However, existing applications do
not follow the basic principal of semantic based publishing

30424

VOLUME 7, 2019

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

as deﬁned by Peroni and Shotton [5]. Our study reveals that
such applications use metadata elements such as Authors
& their afﬁliations, editors & their afﬁliations, publishing
companies etc., and do not look for the citation reasons.
We have examined various available ontologies to ﬁnd one
whether they provide options to record the citations reasons
in a semantically meaningful way. Let’s investigate them one
by one.

A. BiRo
The Bibliographic Reference Ontology (BiRo) [7], based on
FRBR [8] describes individual bibliographic reference and
its relationship to the cited article using two properties; ‘is
referenced by’ and ‘reference’ with domain and range as
‘endeavor’ and ‘bibliographic record’ alternatively. As is
clear from the meanings, both properties do not deﬁne the
nature of relationship between the papers and the reason of
citation.

B. C4O
The Citation Counting & Context Characterization Ontology
(C4O) [7] keeps track of the number of citations that a paper
has received using all possible external sources. The ontology
claims to record the ‘context of citation’, however, this is
a textual context, an in-text reference pointer of where the
citation has been made. Its ‘has context’ property provides
the place where a possible rhetorical motivation for citation
exists but does not exploit the context for possible motivation
or reasons of citation.

C. FaBio
The FRBR-aligned Bibliographic Ontology (FaBio) [5]
mainly records publications such as books, magazines, jour-
nals and their content like algorithms, speciﬁcations, vocabu-
laries or technical reports, that are published or in the process
of being published, using semantic web descriptions. It is also
based on FRBR [8] data model to interlink manifestations,
items and expression and does not deal with the nature of links
between them (citations).

D. DoCO
The Document Component Ontology
[9]
decomposes a research paper document into its structural
and rhetorical components such as Abstract, Introduction,
Results, Conclusion and Bibliography etc. and stores these
components using RDF. The nature of a citation is the dis-
course element of a research paper and this ontology does
not deal with it.

(DoCO)

E. PRO
The Publishing Role Ontology (PRO)1 stores the roles of
agents such as people, organizations or groups involved in
the publication process. It also records the time when a role
assert. However, it does not deal with the citation or its nature.

1http://purl.org/spar/pro/

VOLUME 7, 2019

F. PSO
The Publishing Status Ontology (PSO)2 records the status of
research paper document during its life cycle. It also records
the time duration the document took to transit from one status
to another and the people involved during that. This ontology
also does not deal with citations.

G. SWAN
SWAN 1.0 Discourse Ontology [10] is designed to create
an ecosystems that can create, store, access, integrate and
exchange semantic context of scientiﬁc papers especially
in the ﬁeld of Neuro-medicine and speciﬁcally Alzheimer
Disease (AD). The ontology stores a research statement
with three possible discourse elements: ‘citeAsEvidence’,
‘‘citeLifeScienceEntity’’ and ‘citesReagent’. These discourse
elements relate to each other using a set of relationships that
are ‘discusses’, ‘refutes’, ‘supports’ and ‘alternativeTo’. The
ontology works ﬁne in its intended domain but is not helpful
in other domains.

H. CiTO
The Citation Typing Ontology (CiTO) [5] asserts and char-
acterizes bibliographic references and citations. Citations
have three characteristics ‘direct & explicit’, ‘indirect’ and
‘implicit’. Based on biomedical researchers, the ontology
describes citation nature in terms of the ‘Factual’ and
‘Rhetorical’ relationships and sub-divides them between
‘Positive’, ‘Negative’ and ‘Neutral’. In total,
there are
41 properties and are known as CiTO-Ps.

By examining above ontologies, it becomes clear that the
ontology that comes closest to our research goals is CiTO.
It deﬁnes the nature of citations for intelligent linking and rea-
soning. However, the characterizations deﬁned by CiTO are
very difﬁcult for humans to understand and adopt. Ciancarini
et al. [11] has summarized some problems in it after a careful
analysis of both experimental data and subjects’ feedback.
Based on these and other experiments, some of the limitations
in CiTO are:

1) LESS USED PROPERTIES
There are number of properties deﬁned in CiTO-Ps that are
never used. For instance, the properties deﬁning negative
reasons such as ‘disagreesWith’, ‘disputes’, ‘parodies’, ‘pla-
giarizes’, ‘refutes’, ‘repliesTo’, ‘ridicules’, etc. are used less
frequently than neutral and positive ones [12].

2) MOST USED NEUTRAL PROPERTIES
Some deﬁned properties share different scholarly domains
such as ‘citesForInformation’ and ‘citesAsRelated’and are
the most commonly used properties being the most neutral
ones. Ciancarini et al. [11] revealed that these two properties
are most commonly used even for those instances that can be
deﬁned in a more precise manner such as ‘citesAsAuthority’,
‘citesAsDataSource’, ‘discusses’, etc.

2http://purl.org/spar/pso/

30425

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

FIGURE 1. Methodology.

3) LOWER INTER-RATER AGREEMENT
There are 41 properties in CiTO to deﬁne and annotate a
citation for its reasons. Annotating 41 properties requires a
huge cognitive effort. An experiment [11] between T41 and
T10 was conducted where T41 uses all CiTO-Ps (CiTO
Properties) and T10 uses only a subset of 10 CiTO-Ps. The
experiment revealed that the smaller set of properties are
more usable as compared to a full set for annotating citations
between professors, academic researchers, postdoc and PhD
students.

4) NON-TAXONOMIC ORGANIZATION OF CiTO-Ps
CiTO does not follow a taxonomic organization. Each prop-
erty has its own mapping determined by the mental model.
Some CiTO-Ps exhibit a similar model and can be clustered
into a parent property.

5) CUSTOMIZED PROPERTIES
CiTO lacks support for customization. If an annotator does
not ﬁnd a property that perfectly ﬁts her need; the annotator
selects the property closest to her mental model. Latest CiTO
release has targeted this issue by making the organization
of the ontology (i.e., the TBox) static, while users are free
to express their characterizations precisely, capturing details
and tones.

6) MISINTERPRETATION OF PROPERTIES
There are some properties in CiTO that users normally misun-
derstand, or interpret them in different ways, making a clear
indicator for the need of improvements [11].

7) PROPERTIES PERSPECTIVE
CiTO properties conform to the annotator’s perspective and
not to the author’s perspective. ‘disagreesWith’, ‘disputes’,
‘parodies’, ‘plagiarizes’, ‘refutes’, ‘repliesTo’, ‘ridicules’,

etc. are some examples that only an annotator can use and not
the author himself. An author of a scientiﬁc paper can better
deﬁne a citation reason than the perception of an annotator.
This change of perspective can make the citation reasons
more semantically deﬁned.

Based on biomedical researchers, CiTO describes the
nature of citations in scientiﬁc research articles in terms of
the factual and rhetorical relationships. However, there are
number of problems, especially the large number of proper-
ties deﬁned in CiTO and the fact that all classes have same
weightage. Experiments have revealed that lesser number
of properties has better cognitive value and a taxonomical
hierarchy between these properties is required. Therefore,
a requirement emerges for the development of an ontology
that focuses on the author’s perspective and has a lesser num-
ber of properties for better cognitive value. We have sketched
a methodology to deﬁne this new semantic representation of
citation reasons known as Ontology for Citation Reasons.

III. METHODOLOGY
Figure 1 displays the main process blocks of our adopted
methodology. The methodology mainly consists of two
blocks. First block (A, B) deﬁnes steps to develop the ontol-
ogy itself whereas second block (C, D, E) outlines the steps
to instantiate and map the ontology classes and properties on
selected dataset. Details of individual processes are;

A. CITATION’S CONTEXT AND REASONS
There have been several researches to ﬁnd the impact of
a citation [13] or to recognize the type of inﬂuence [14]
a citation has. The ﬁrst step in our methodology is to
explore and list all such reasons and motivations found in
the literature and classify them based on their sentimen-
tal context by classifying the listed reasons in ‘Positive’,
‘Negative’ and ‘Neutral’ contexts with the help of a domain
expert.

30426

VOLUME 7, 2019

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

B. CLUSTER REASON CLASSES WITH TITLES
The collected citation reasons are large in number and have
overlapped and diffused meanings. Next step is to cluster the
citation reasons with similar and disjoint meanings (if possi-
ble) with the help of experts’ opinion and name them with a
title exhibiting their collaborative meanings and constituting
motivations. These set of classes will formulate the basis of
our proposed ontology.

C. DATA SET
We have used a speciﬁc version of AAN dataset as an
input for the instantiation in our experiments. ACL Anthol-
ogy Network (AAN) [15] is a comprehensive, manually
curated dataset that houses all papers published by ACL
and Computational Linguistics journal over a period of
four decades. Athar [16] developed a new annotated cor-
pus of more than 8,700 citation sentences based on AAN,
labelled with ‘Citing Paper ID’, ‘Cited Paper ID’, ‘Citation
Text’ and its ‘Sentiment Polarity’ as ‘Positive’, ‘Negative’ or
‘Neutral’.

D. EXTRACT VERBS
Several toolkits are available that can successfully recog-
nize and tag part-of-speech verb clauses and link them with
knowledge base [17]. After a small survey of these toolkits,
we have selected Stanford NLP [18] for experiment as it best
suits our requirements. The process to tag and extract verbs
from a citation text has three steps. The ﬁrst step uses the
POS Tagger to tag part-of-speech ‘Verbs’ in complete dataset.
Next step uses Lemmatization and Stemming alternatively
to convert verbs into its basic form. In the last step, unique
verbs and their frequencies in the complete dataset is calcu-
lated. As the dataset contains citation texts available in all
3 sentiment polarities, therefore, all the extracted verbs are
analyzed against the sentiment polarity of their parent citation
texts.

E. MAP ONTOLOGY CLASS
A Stanford linguistic Beth Levin [6] provided an inventory
of English verbs and organized it in a knowledge base.
He deﬁned two distinct verb categories in English language
that are ‘transformation and creation’ and ‘change of the
state’ and subsume several verbs. The complete inventory
contains 230 classes and over 3000 English verbs distributed
among the deﬁned classes. The class we are interested in
is ‘Verbs with Predicative Complements’ and has eight sub-
classes with a unique set of properties and a collaborative
meaning.

Using this knowledge base and the extracted verbs in
each sentiment, a mapping graph can be formulated that
provides a high level of abstraction on reason classes. Based
on citation context, one such property can be attributed to
multiple classes. Therefore, the combination becomes a graph
rather than a tree where one individual verb can belong to
multiple classes based on citation’s sentiment, making the

FIGURE 2. Citation reason clusters and classes.

classes semantically coherent. Now the next step is to assign
a citation text a reason class. After ﬁnding the sentiment
of a citation, the dominant verb is extracted is extracted
using NLP techniques. Using this information, the citation
text is mapped onto a citation reason class with the help of
formulated Mapping Graph.

IV. EXPERIMENTS TO DEVELOP ONTOLOGY
In order to develop ontology, two different experiments are
required. First is to ﬁnd, list and classify citation reasons
available in the literature using sentiment analysis techniques.
Second is to cluster the surveyed citation reasons based on
meanings and motivations within their respective sentiments
with the help of experts. These experiments are performed
by following the methodology explained in the previous
section and their results are described in the coming sub
sections.

A. CITATION’S CONTEXT AND REASONS
We have collected around 150 citation reasons after studying
the available literature (1965 – 2018) about the possible rea-
sons of why a research paper is cited. These citation reasons
have overlapped and diffused meanings and have different
context. Sentiment analysis is a form of opinion mining with
positive, negative or neutral opinions [16]. Citation reasons
are important to formulate opinions and a sentiment value of
a citation reason can provide a clear indication of the author’s
opinion. Therefore, using well-deﬁned sentiment analysis
techniques, we have broadly categorized them in three dis-
tinct context classes; ‘Positive’, ‘Negative’ and ‘Neutral’as
outlined in Table 1.

B. CLUSTER CITATION REASONS
In order to cluster citation reasons based on the mean-
ings and constituting motivations, a group of experts that

VOLUME 7, 2019

30427

TABLE 1. Survey on all possible citation reason classes.

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

30428

VOLUME 7, 2019

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

TABLE 1. (Continued.) Survey on all possible citation reason classes.

TABLE 2. Citation reasons classes.

FIGURE 3. Citation’s context and reason ontology – CCRO.

consists of four experts in English Linguistics (2 Lecturers
and 2 MS Students), created clusters of citation reasons
within each sentiment class with inter-rate agreement of 80%
based on their syntactic relevancy and semantic coherence.
The study revealed that there are three clusters in ‘Posi-
tive’, three in ‘Negative’ and two in ‘Neutral’ sentiments.
Afterwards, an appropriate title was assigned to each cluster
along with the collaborative meaning as shown in Table 2.
Figure 2 is a graphical representation of the formulated
clusters.

V. CITATION’S CONTEXT AND REASONS ONTOLOGY
Based on the above experiments and their results, we have
deﬁned ‘Citation’s Context and Reasons Ontology – CCRO’,
both at the schema and instance level. CCRO deﬁnes a
taxonomical hierarchy of eight object properties distributed
among three main sentiment-based reasons. Using the ontol-
ogy concept, a citation can have ‘Positive’, ‘Negative’ or
‘Neutral’ context or sentiment with a possibility of being a
part of one of its constituent properties. Figure 3 describes
classes and object properties for Ontology for Citation Rea-
sons. The name-space used is ‘‘http://ccropus’’ for CCRO and
is abbreviated as ccro.

VOLUME 7, 2019

30429

A. CCRO CLASSES
Base class of CCRO is a ‘Paper’ that corresponds to any
type of research document such as a book, conference paper,
journal article, presentation, report or thesis etc. It has

two subclasses ‘ccro:CitingPaper’ and ‘ccro:CitedPaper’.
‘ccro:CitingPaper’ is any document that refers to another
document whereas the document being referred is the
‘ccro:CitedPaper’. Each citing paper consists of citation
texts that are structured around main verbs. Two classes
‘ccro:Citation’ and ‘ccro:MainVerb’ deﬁne this concept.
‘ccro:MainVerb’ refers to the words with part of speech as
verb and is equivalent to the class of main verb in OLiA3
ontology, an annotation model based on morphology.

B. CCRO OBJECT PROPERTIES
CCRO deﬁnes Object Properties in a hierarchy with three
main properties ‘ccro:consitsOf’, ‘ccro:isStructuredAround’
‘ccro:consitsOf’ deﬁnes citation text
and ‘ccro:Cites’.
with domain ‘ccro:CitingPaper’ and range ‘ccro:Citation’.
As deﬁned earlier, each citation text is structured around
a main verb, thus ‘ccro:isStructuredAround’ is used for
the said purpose with a domain ‘ccro:Citation’ and range
‘ccro:MainVerb’.

Third property is a hierarchy of properties that starts
with a coarsely deﬁned citation reason and then incremen-
tally it becomes more deﬁned at each level. All proper-
ties in the hierarchy have similar domain and range that is
‘ccro:CitingPaper’ and ‘ccro:CitedPaper’ respectively. The
hierarchy has three levels. At the base level is the property
‘ccro:Cite’ that deﬁnes any generic reason for citation. The
next level decomposes the nature of citation based on senti-
ment with three classes that are:

• ‘ccro:citesWithPositiveReason’
• ‘ccro:citesWithNegativeReason’
• ‘ccro:citesWithNeutralReason’
All the above three properties are disjoint in nature whereas
positive and negative reason classes are inverse of each other.
The third level deﬁnes cognitive reason property based on our
experiments. These properties are distributed among different
sentiments and refer to a speciﬁc type of reason that is asso-
ciated with an English verb category in the dictionary with
shared meanings and syntactical behavior. There are eight
properties, ﬁrst three are sub properties of positive, next three
are of negative and last two are of neutral reasons. These
properties are

• ‘ccro:Incorporate’
• ‘ccro:Extend’
• ‘ccro:BasedOn’
• ‘ccro:Negate’
• ‘ccro:Crticize’
• ‘ccro:Contrast’
• ‘ccro:Compare’
• ‘ccro:Discuss’

C. CCRO INSTANCE LEVEL
After deﬁning the schema level classes and properties,
the next step is to encode a mapping between the extracted
individual English verbs and the corresponding reason classes

3http://nachhalt.sfb632.uni-potsdam.de/owl/olia.owl

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

FIGURE 4. Instance level schema – definition.

using the developed dictionary. We instantiate each English
verb at the instance level with a ‘ccro:MainVerb’ class and
then map the verb with associated reason property. For exam-
ple, two of the most common verbs used in ACL Anthology
Network Citation Data are ‘Use’ and ‘Describe’. These two
verbs will be initially instantiated as ‘ccro:MainVerb’. Next,
using the sentiment polarity of the citation in which these
verbs are used, a mapping connects the citations to their
corresponding reason classes. It should be noted here that
each individual verb can be associated with several reasons
based on the context (sentiment) in which that verb is used.
Deﬁnition (Verb ‘‘V’’): V verb is an instance of
‘ccro:MainVerb’ class and refers to ‘any reason for citing’
based on the sentiment of the citation text in which it is used.
A small example, shown in Figure 4, describes two verbs
when used in different sentiments, with reference to their
corresponding classes and Figure 5 shows the graphical rep-
resentation of the example.

D. CCRO CITATION GRAPH
Scientiﬁc literature can be visualized as a networked informa-
tion space that contains a collection of information entities
inter-connected by a link-structure. In this interconnected
network, scientiﬁc papers are ‘information entities’ and their
links are deﬁned as citations. A citation graph represents
the network where each paper becomes the node and their
citation link becomes the edge between the nodes. Citation
link also implies that the citation graph is a directed graph
where one paper cites the paper at the other node. CCRO
classes deﬁne the edge between these nodes making citation
graph a semantic graph where each edge is represented using
an RDF triple as shown in Figure 6.

VI. ONTOLOGY EVALUATION
Ontologies can be evaluated on their syntactic and semantic
structure and is normally referred as content-based evalua-
tion. There are two methods available to evaluate an ontology,
one is using automated evaluation tools and other is by user-
study. To evaluate the proposed ontology, both the approaches
are used.

A. AUTOMATED TOOL EVALUATION
Various automated evaluation tools can evaluate contents
of the ontology for checking the syntax of the language
used to describe the ontology. In our experiment, we have

30430

VOLUME 7, 2019

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

FIGURE 5. Citation’s context and reason ontology – instance level.

TABLE 4. CCRO evaluation by domain experts.

FIGURE 6. Citation link RDF triple graph.

TABLE 3. CCRO evaluation using automated evaluation tools.

used OWL2 Validator4 for property analysis, Hermit Rea-
soner [47] to identify basic errors in the ontology and Fact++
Reasoner5 for inconsistency errors. Both Hermit and Fact++
Reasoners are conﬁgured on Class, Object Property, Data
Property and Individual preferences. Findings of each tool are
shown in Table 3.

B. USER STUDY EVALUATION
To evaluate proposed ontology based on user study, a ques-
tionnaire was designed using the outline provided by [48]
and [49]. The questionnaire deals with ‘Incomplete Concept
Classiﬁcation’, ‘Disjoint Knowledge Omission’, ‘Exhaustive
Knowledge Omission’ and ‘Scientiﬁc Knowledge Omission’.
Each area contains two questions. First, a binary Yes or
No question asking if the issue exists or not, and second
is a descriptive question based on the answer of the ﬁrst.
Domain experts with vast experience in Digital Library, NLP
and Computational Linguistics evaluated the ontology using
the prescribed questionnaire. Table 4 outlines omissions
and recommendations suggested by experts. Based on the

4http://mowl-power.cs.man.ac.uk
5http://owl.man.ac.uk/factplusplus/

VOLUME 7, 2019

recommendations, the updated ontology is now publicly
available at https://github.com/imranihsan/CCRO.

VII. ONTOLOGY INSTANTIATION
After the development and evaluation of proposed ontol-
ogy, next step is to formulate experiments for instantiation
of ontology classes and properties on real data. Using the
methodology, two more experiments are performed. First
is to extract the unique verbs from selected dataset with
their frequencies and their distribution across all three senti-
ments [50]. The second experiment is to instantiate and map
the extracted verbs on reason classes using Levin’s knowl-
edge base.

A. EXTRACT UNIQUE VERBS
The POS Tagger can read a text string and assign parts
of speech to each word such as noun, verb, adjective etc.
We developed an application that read the ACL Anthol-
ogy Network (AAN)
line by line. Each
[15] dataset
line contains a citation text. After applying lemmatization
and stemming, POS Tagger tagged verbs in six different
forms.

1. VB Verb,
2. VBD Verb,
3. VBG Verb,

base form
past tense
gerund or present participle

30431

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

Using this conceptual hierarchy of verb classes, we deﬁned
a mapping graph. The unique properties and collaborative
meaning of each verb class correspond to each citation class
that has similar collaborative properties. Each verb can have
‘Positive’, ‘Negative’ or ‘Neutral’ sentiment based on its
context. Therefore, we have visualized each verb in all three
sentiments making them semantically coherent. A complete
mapping of the classiﬁed verbs based on Levin Conceptual
Hierarchy and Citation Cognitive Classes formulated the
mapping graph. A group of four English Linguistics experts
(2 Lecturers and 2 MS Students) formulated the dictionary.
Figure 9 represents a partial representation of this mapping
graph.

Next each citation text was read from dataset along with its
sentiment polarity and using similar NLP techniques deﬁned
earlier, dominant verb was extracted from each citation text.
With a help of mapping dictionary, the selected verbs were
mapped onto one or more ontology class, formulating a cog-
nitive relationship between citing and cited paper. A complete
mapping procedure in all 3 sentiments is shown next.

VIII. ONTOLOGY MAPPING
Based on the developed ontology, we present here three
mappings on selected citation texts from the ACL Anthology
Network Dataset with ‘Positive’, ‘Negative’ and ‘Neutral’
citation context. Additionally, we use NIF6 (NLP Interchange
Format) and BiRO7 (Bibliographic Reference Ontology)
vocabularies to annotate the citations.

A. POSITIVE CITATION REASONS MAPPING USING CCRO
Figure 10 shows two citation texts with a Positive sentiment.
The ﬁrst ID is the citing paper and the second ID is the cited
paper. Citation#1 is structured around the verb ‘describe’ and
Citation#2 around the verb ‘add’. Both the citations share
a similar meaning in the sense that both are incorporating
other algorithms in their research. Based on the developed
dictionary, annotating these two citation texts via CCRO leads
us to obtain the reason as ‘ccro:Incorporate’.

B. NEGATIVE CITATION REASONS MAPPING USING CCRO
Figure 11 describes two citations with a negative sentiment.
Citation#3 is structured around the verb ‘outperform’ and
Citation#4 around the verb ‘work’. Both the citations share a
similar meaning as both are negating existing work. Based on
the developed dictionary, annotating these two citation texts
via CCRO generates ‘ccro:Negate’.

C. NEUTRAL CITATION REASONS MAPPING USING CCRO
Figure 12 also shows two citations with a neutral sentiment.
Citation#5 is structured around the verb ‘describe’ and Cita-
tion#2 around the verb ‘come’. Both the citations share a
similar meaning in the sense that both are discussing existing

6http://persistence.uni-leipzig.org/nlp2rdf/ontologies/nif-core/nif-

core.html

7http://www.sparontologies.net/ontologies/biro/source.html

FIGURE 7. Verbs with frequency > 200 in AAN dataset.

FIGURE 8. High occurrence verbs distribution in 3 sentiments.

past participle
non-3rd person singular present
3rd person singular present

4. VBN Verb,
5. VBP Verb,
6. VBZ Verb,
Once the tagging was complete, a simple algorithm found
the unique verbs and calculated their frequency (No of times
used in the complete dataset). The results showed that there
were 389 unique verbs present. To ﬁnd the accuracy of the
results, we randomly selected ﬁve sets of 100 citation texts
each and asked our language experts to mark the verbs. The
experiment revealed that the accuracy of automated verb
extraction application was 88.25%. Results also suggested
that verb ‘use’ is the most common verb used by the authors
with a frequency of 3425. Figure 7 shows verbs with fre-
quency greater than 200 within AAN dataset.

After ﬁnding the frequency of verbs in complete dataset,
next step is analyzing the distribution of these verbs in
different sentiments. Using the sentiment polarity informa-
tion available in selected dataset, each verb frequency was
checked in citation texts with ‘Positive’, ‘Negative’ and
‘Neutral’ sentiments. The dataset contains 829 citation texts
with ‘Positive’ sentiment, 280 with ‘Negative’ sentiment and
7627 with ‘Neutral’ sentiment. The resultant distribution for
high occurrence verbs is shown in Figure 8.

B. MAP ONTOLOGY CLASS
lexical knowledge deﬁnes each English verb
Levin’s
class using two characteristics: ‘semantically coherent’ and
‘shared syntactic behavior’. Semantically coherent means the
verbs exhibit unique properties that have shared meanings.
An individual verb can be associated to multiple classes
depending upon context in which it is used, thus making
the relationship a graph rather than a tree. Whereas shared
syntactic behavior describes verb in terms of expression and
interpretation. Verbs that share meaning exhibit similar syn-
tactic behavior [51].

30432

VOLUME 7, 2019

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

FIGURE 9. Partial representation of dictionary – a mapping between Levin conceptual hierarchy verbs and citation reason
classes.

VOLUME 7, 2019

30433

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

FIGURE 10. Positive citation reason mapping using CCRO.

FIGURE 11. Negative citation reason mapping using CCRO.

works as literature review. Based on the developed dictionary,
annotating these two citation texts via CCRO leads us to
obtain the reason class as ‘ccro:Discuss’.

D. CCRO MAPPING
Using the techniques deﬁned above, complete citation texts
available in ACL Anthology Network Dataset are mapped
using the developed ontology. Texts in the selected corpus are
labelled with ‘Positive’, ‘Negative’ and ‘Neutral’ sentiments.
Experts in English Linguistics labelled the citation texts using
CCRO classes with inter-rater agreement of above 90%.
Figure 13 shows the CCRO mapping on ACL Anthology
Network dataset with 9% Positive, 3% Negative and 88%
Neutral citation reasons. Kindly note the deﬁned ontology is
not corpus dependent and can be mapped to any dataset.

IX. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Semantic interlinking between the research papers can play
an important role. With a citation graph enriched with citation
reasons, it is possible to infer the evolution of a research area
over time, measure relations between research areas and trace
the inﬂuence of ideas that appear in the literature. In order to
achieve this a well-deﬁned methodology has been formulated
to deﬁne the Citation’s Context and Reasons Ontology. The
methodology also describes how to instantiate and map the
ontology on existing literature. By ﬁnding the sentiment and
the dominant verb of a citation text, the Mapping Graph can
easily annotate citations with reason classes.

Once these ontology classes are visualized, a publishing
system can be developed that help authors to mention the cita-
tion reasons at the time of authoring a research article, where

FIGURE 12. Use case 3: neutral citation reason using CCRO.

Berners-Lee et al.’s [52] vision of semantic web and giving
meanings to hyperlinks can be adapted in its true essence
for scholarly publishing and enable digital libraries to answer
queries [53] like ‘‘What is the current state of the debate on
this question?’’, ‘‘Who disagrees with this theory?’’, ‘‘Was
this prediction ever fulﬁlled?’’, ‘‘What assumptions does this

30434

VOLUME 7, 2019

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

FIGURE 13. CCRO mapping on ACL anthology network Dataset.

approach depend on?’’, and ‘‘Are there different schools of
thought around this problem?’’ etc.

In Future, we are working on an automated system to anno-
tate the citation link with CCRO classes using content-based
citation analysis and machine learning algorithms. We are
also working on semantic based LaTeX authoring tool that
can integrate CCRO classes within the cite function that can
be deﬁned by the author himself at the time of writing a
research paper.

X. CONCLUSION
A scientiﬁc research paper contains vital information that
incites its citation by the authors and researchers based on
diverse and innumerable reasons. After a through survey on
semantic representations and limitations of these reasons,
an ontology, titled ‘‘CCRO: Citation’s Context and Reasons
Ontology’’, is being proposed which gives the abstract con-
ceptualization required to organize the citations’ relations.
This ontology successfully distills down into eight distinct
and mutually exclusive classes, all routed from ‘Positive’,
‘Negative’ and ‘Neutral’ sentiments. After identifying and
extracting the dominant verb in a citation text, it can be
mapped to the relevant CCRO classes based on the con-
text (sentiment) in which the verb is used. As the scien-
tiﬁc researchers and authors around the world recognize the
utmost importance of the relevancy and appropriateness of the
cited paper, the application of the proposed ontology would
facilitate them in recognizing scholarly paths and links with
a remarkably reduced human effort. A semantic interlinking
among the scholarly and scientiﬁc literature can lay a path for
future collaborative learning and research.

REFERENCES
[1] E. Garﬁeld, ‘‘When to cite,’’ Library Quart. Inf., Community, Policy,

vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 449–458, 1996.

[2] S. E. Cozzens, ‘‘Comparing the sciences: Citation context analysis of
papers from neuropharmacology and the sociology of science,’’ Social
Stud. Sci., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 127–153, 1985.

[3] E. Orduña-Malea, J. M. Ayllón, A. Martín-Martín, and E. D. López-Cózar.
the size of Google Scholar: Playing the numbers.’’

(2014). ‘‘About
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1407.6239

[4] B. Motik, B. Parsia, and P. F. Patel-Schneider, ‘‘OWL 2 Web ontol-
ogy language XML serialization,’’ W3C Recommendation, W3C, Cam-
bridge, MA, USA, Tech. Rep. 20121211, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-xml-serialization/

[5] S. Peroni and D. Shotton, ‘‘FaBiO and CiTO: Ontologies for describ-
ing bibliographic resources and citations,’’ J. Web Semantics, vol. 17,
pp. 33–43, Dec. 2012.

[6] B. Levin, English Verb Classes and Alternations: A Preliminary Investiga-

tion. Chicago, IL, USA: Univ. Chicago Press, 1993.

[7] A. Di Iorio, A. G. Nuzzolese, S. Peroni, D. Shotton, and F. Vitali, ‘‘Describ-
ing bibliographic references in RDF,’’ in Proc. 4th Workshop Semantic
Publishing-SePublica, G. Castro and A. García, Ed., vol. 1155, 2014,
pp. 41–56.

[8] B. Tillett, ‘‘What is FRBR? A conceptual model for the bibliographic

universe,’’ Austral. Library J., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 24–30, 2005.

[9] A. Constantin, S. Peroni, S. Pettifer, D. Shotton, and F. Vitali,
‘‘The document components ontology (DoCO),’’ Semantic Web, vol. 7,
no. 2, pp. 167–181, 2016.

[10] P. Ciccarese et al.,

‘‘The SWAN biomedical discourse ontology,’’

J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 739–751, 2008.

[11] P. Ciancarini, A. Di Iorio, A. G. Nuzzolese, S. Peroni, and F. Vitali, ‘‘Evalu-
ating citation functions in CiTO: Cognitive issues,’’ in The Semantic Web:
Trends and Challenges (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 8465
LNCS, 2014, pp. 580–594.

[12] S. Teufel, A. Siddharthan, and D. Tidhar, ‘‘An annotation scheme for
citation function,’’ in Proc. 7th SIGdial Workshop Discourse Dialogue,
Jul. 2006, pp. 80–87.

[13] N. S. Young, J. P. A. Ioannidis, and O. Al-Ubaydli, ‘‘Why current publi-
cation practices may distort science,’’ PLoS Med., vol. 5, no. 10, p. e201,
2008.

[14] G. Zhang, Y. Ding, and S. Milojević, ‘‘Citation content analysis (CCA):
A framework for syntactic and semantic analysis of citation content,’’
J. Amer. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 1490–1503, 2013.
[15] D. R. Radev, P. Muthukrishnan, V. Qazvinian, and A. Abu-Jbara,
‘‘The ACL anthology network corpus,’’ Lang. Resour. Eval., vol. 47, no. 4,
pp. 919–944, 2013.

[16] A. Athar, ‘‘Sentiment analysis of scientiﬁc citations,’’ Cambridge, Com-
put. Laboratory, Cambridge, U.K., Tech. Rep. UCAM-CL-TR-856, 2014,
p. 114.

[17] J. R. Finkel, T. Grenager, and C. Manning, ‘‘Incorporating non-local infor-
mation into information extraction systems by Gibbs sampling,’’ in Proc.
43rd Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics (ACL), 2005, pp. 363–370.
[18] C. Manning, M. Surdeanu, J. Bauer, J. Finkel, S. Bethard, and
D. McClosky, ‘‘The stanford CoreNLP natural
language processing
toolkit,’’ in Proc. 52nd Annu. Meeting Assoc. for Comput. Linguistics, Syst.
Demonstrations, 2014, pp. 55–60.

[19] B.-A. Lipetz, ‘‘Improvement of the selectivity of citation indexes to sci-
ence literature through inclusion of citation relationship indicators,’’ Amer.
Document., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 81–90, 1965.

[20] D. E. Chubin and S. D. Moitra, ‘‘Content analysis of references: Adjunct
or alternative to citation counting?’’ Social Stud. Sci., vol. 5, no. 4,
pp. 423–441, 1975.

[21] M. J. Moravcsik and P. Murugesan, ‘‘Some results on the function and
quality of citations,’’ Social Stud. Sci., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 86–92, 1975.
[22] I. Spiegel-Rosing, ‘‘Science studies: Bibliometric and content analysis,’’

Social Stud. Sci., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 97–113, 1977.

[23] C. Oppenheim and E. Garﬁeld, ‘‘Highly cited old papers,’’ J. Amer. Soc.

Inf. Sci., vol. 31, no. 3, p. 219, 1980.

[24] C. O. Frost, ‘‘The use of citations in literary research: A preliminary clas-
siﬁcation of citation functions,’’ Library Quart., Inf., Community, Policy,
vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 399–414, 1979.

[25] B. C. Peritz, ‘‘A classiﬁcation of citation roles for the social sciences and

related ﬁelds,’’ Scientometrics, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 303–312, 1983.

[26] M. Katherine and T. Kathleen, ‘‘Citation context analysis and aging pat-
terns of journal articles in molecular genetics,’’ Scientometrics, vol. 17,
nos. 1–2, pp. 127–163, 1989.

[27] S. Teufel, A. Siddharthan, and D. Tidhar, ‘‘Automatic classiﬁcation of cita-
tion function,’’ in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process.,
Jul. 2006, pp. 103–110.

[28] B. Jörg, ‘‘Towards the Nature of Citations,’’ in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Formal

Ontol. Inf. Syst., 2008, pp. 31–36.

[29] M. A. Angrosh, S. Craneﬁeld, and N. Stanger, ‘‘Context identiﬁcation
of sentences in related work sections using a conditional random ﬁeld:
Towards intelligent digital libraries,’’ in Proc. 10th ACM/IEEE-CS Joint
Conf. Digit. Libraries, Jun. 2010, pp. 293–302.

[30] A. Athar, ‘‘Sentiment analysis of citations using sentence structure-based

features,’’ in Proc. ACL Student Session, Jun. 2011, pp. 81–87.

[31] C. Dong and U. Schäfer, ‘‘Ensemble-style self-training on citation clas-
siﬁcation,’’ in Proc. 5th Int. Joint Conf. Natural Lang. Process., 2011,
pp. 623–631.

VOLUME 7, 2019

30435

[32] A. Athar and S. Teufel, ‘‘Context-enhanced citation sentiment detection,’’
in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum.
Lang. Technol., 2012, pp. 597–601.

[33] N. Tandon and A. Jain, ‘‘Citation context sentiment analysis for structured
summarization of research papers,’’ in Proc. 35th German Conf. Artif.
Intell. (KI), 2012, pp. 98–102.

[34] C. Jochim and H. Schütze, ‘‘Towards a generic and ﬂexible citation
classiﬁer based on a faceted classiﬁcation scheme,’’ in Proc. COLING,
Dec. 2012, pp. 1343–1358.

[35] B. Yu, ‘‘Automated citation sentiment analysis: What can we learn from
biomedical researchers,’’ in Proc. ASIST Annu. Meeting, 2013, vol. 50,
no. 1, p. 83.

[36] X. Li, Y. He, A. Meyers, and R. Grishman, ‘‘Towards ﬁne-grained citation
function classiﬁcation,’’ in Proc. RANLP, Sep. 2013, pp. 402–407.
[37] H. Xu, E. Martin, and A. Mahidadia, ‘‘Using heterogeneous features
for scientiﬁc citation classiﬁcation,’’ in Proc. 13th Conf. Paciﬁc Assoc.
Comput. Linguistics, 2013, pp. 1–8.

[38] M. A. Hernández and J. M. Gómez, ‘‘Survey in sentiment, polarity and
function analysis of citation,’’ in Proc. First Workshop Argumentation
Mining, 2014, pp. 102–103.

[39] X. Wan and F. Liu, ‘‘Are all literature citations equally important? Auto-
matic citation strength estimation and its applications,’’ J. Assoc. Inf. Sci.
Technol., vol. 65, no. 9, pp. 1929–1938, 2014.

[40] M. Valenzuela, V. Ha, and O. Etzioni, ‘‘Identifying meaningful citations,’’

in Proc. AAAI Workshop Scholarly Big Data, 2015, p. 6.

[41] B. H. Butt, M. Raﬁ, A. Jamal, R. S. Ur Rehman, S. M. Z. Alam, and
M. B. Alam, ‘‘Classiﬁcation of research citations (CRC),’’ in Proc. CEUR
Workshop, vol. 1384, Jan. 2015, pp. 1–10.

[42] I. C. Kim and G. R. Thoma, ‘‘Automated classiﬁcation of author’s senti-
ments in citation using machine learning techniques: A preliminary study,’’
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Intell. Bioinf. Comput. Biol., (CIBCB),
Aug. 2015, pp. 1–7.

[43] J. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Wang, X. Dong, and H. Xu, ‘‘Citation sen-
timent analysis in clinical trial papers,’’ in Proc. Annu. Symp., 2015,
pp. 1334–1341.

[44] P. A. H. Kazi and M. S. Patwardhan, ‘‘Context based citation summary of
research articles: A step towards qualitative citation index,’’ in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Control, (IC), Sep. 2015, pp. 1–6.

[45] R. Jha, A. A. Jbara, V. Qazvinian, and D. R. Radev, ‘‘NLP-driven cita-
tion analysis for scientometrics,’’ Natural Lang. Eng., vol. 23, no. 1,
pp. 93–130, 2017.

[46] Z. Taşkin and U. Al, ‘‘A content-based citation analysis study based on text
categorization,’’ Scientometrics, vol. 114, no. 1, pp. 335–357, 2018.
[47] B. Glimm, I. Horrocks, B. Motik, G. Stoilos, and Z. Wang, ‘‘HermiT:
An OWL 2 reasoner,’’ J. Automated Reasoning, vol. 53, no. 3,
pp. 245–269, 2014.

[48] M. Fernandez-Lopez and O. Corcho, Ontological Engineering: With
Examples From the Areas of Knowledge Management, e-Commerce and
the Semantic Web, 1st ed. Springer, 2010.

[49] M. Fahad, M. A. Qadir, and M. W. Noshairwan, ‘‘Ontological errors-
inconsistency, incompleteness and redundancy,’’ in Proc. 10th Int. Conf.
Enterprise Inf. Syst. (ICEIS), 2008, pp. 253–285.

[50] I. Ihsan, S. Imran, and O. Ahmed, ‘‘Sentiment based study of citations’
reporting verb corpus using natural language processing,’’ Corporum, J.
Corpus Linguistics, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 1–10, Feb. 2019.

[51] S. Shekarpour, V. Shalin, K. Thirunarayan, and A. P. Sheth. (2017).
‘‘CEVO: Comprehensive EVent ontology enhancing cognitive annota-
tion.’’ [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.05625

[52] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, ‘‘The semantic Web,’’ Sci.

Amer., vol. 284, no. 5, pp. 34–43, 2001.

[53] S. B. Shum, T. Clark, A. de Waard, T. Groza, S. Handschuh, and
A. Sandor, ‘‘Scientiﬁc discourse on the semantic Web: A survey of models
and enabling technologies,’’ Semantic Web J., Interoperability, Usability,
Applicability, Special Issue on Survey Articles, pp. 1–34, 2010.

I. Ihsan, M. A. Qadir: CCRO

IMRAN IHSAN received the M.Sc. degree in
physics from the University of the Punjab, Lahore,
the M.C.S. degree in computer science from
Hamdard University, Islamabad, and the M.S.
(CS) degree in multimedia communication from
Mohammad Ali Jinnah University, Islamabad,
Pakistan. He has 20 years of academic (teaching,
project supervision, and academic administration)
and industry experience in software, web, graph-
ics, animation, game design and development, and
operational management. Since 2013, he has been an Assistant Professor
with the Department of Computer Science, Air University, Islamabad. He is
currently involved in doctoral research in the ﬁeld of semantic computing,
natural language processing, and computational linguistics at the Center for
Research in Data Science, Semantic and Scientometrics, Capital University
of Science and Technology, Islamabad. He is also the Head of the Cen-
ter for Smart Data, doing research in big data analytics, and knowledge
engineering from unstructured data and smart data acquisition. He was a
Project Manager for two national-level research projects, funded by the ICT
R&D Fund (Ignite) and HEC. He has authored or co-authored research work
in various international conferences and journals. He has supervised many
award-winning undergraduate projects. For more information about him, just
log on to www.imranihsan.com.

MUHAMMAD ABDUL QADIR received the
Ph.D. degree in distributed computing from the
University of Surrey, U.K., in 1995. He has been
associated with academia and industry at differ-
ent levels for the last 20 years. He is currently a
Professor with the Department of Computer Sci-
ence, Capital University of Science and Technol-
ogy, Islamabad. He is also the Dean of the Faculty
of Computing. He is a Computing Professional
and has membership in different international and
national professional bodies. Under his supervision, more than 40 students
have successfully completed their research thesis at the M.S. and Ph.D. level
and a number of research students are pursuing their research with him.
He has successfully completed two national-level research projects in the
capacity of project director in collaboration with industry and funded by the
National ICT R&D Fund (Ignite) with a budget more than 40 Million. He has
been collaborating with many national and international level researchers.
He has been playing a leading role in the management of industry and
academia and has produced signiﬁcant results in achieving the goals of
different research and development and higher education organizations.
He has over 150 research publications in internationally reputed journals
and conference proceedings. His research work has been cited by more than
700 research articles published worldwide. His current research interests
include the development of intelligent techniques for data-driven information
extraction (the ﬁfth wave of computing) from unstructured/semistructured
Web and biological data, by utilizing semantic web tools and ontology. His
h-index is more than 15. His co-author’s network consists of more than
60 authors with good research credentials. He has presented his scholarly
work in many reputed conferences all over the world. He has served on
the organizing and technical committees of many national and international
conferences. He is also a Reviewer of many international journal publishing
in the area of computer science.

30436

VOLUME 7, 2019

