The Emerald Research Register for this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/researchregister

The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/1469-1930.htm

Intellectual capital
Measurement effectiveness
Gopika Kannan
DaimlerChrysler Research and Technology India, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Wilfried G. Aulbur
DaimlerChrysler AG, Stuttgart, Germany

Keywords Intellectual capital, Measurement, Knowledge management

Abstract Intellectual capital (IC), knowledge management and intangible assets are important
factors in determining the value of an organization, as reﬂected in the growth of the knowledge
management industry. There is however, a lack of effective measurement techniques to specify and
optimize the value of IC. This paper presents a detailed review of existing techniques and establish
the need for a more comprehensive approach. The proposed framework addresses IC valuation
issues across the IC cycle. People, process, and technology are measured and correlated in the ﬁnal
step with social and ﬁnancial measures, thus providing a new framework.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, businesses have recognized the importance of managing their
intangible assets. The development of brands, stakeholder relationships, reputation
and the culture of organizations are viewed as providing sustainable sources of
business advantage. The ability to build and leverage the value of these intangible
assets constitutes a core competency for organizations.

However, recent studies (McGrath, 1996) claim that empirical evidence and work,
supporting theory is lacking. Clearly, empirical work must be based on adequate
measurement frameworks that capture the organizational, process and ﬁnancial
impacts of knowledge intensive business strategies[1].

Early measurements of intellectual capital (IC) focus on the accounting and ﬁnancial
perspective. Most of the research centers primarily around three questions: What
causes the discrepancy between a ﬁrm’s book value and the value of its physical
assets? What are their intangible assets? And what characterizes their value? We need
to deﬁne what constitutes intellectual capital, to answer these questions.

1.1 Deﬁning IC
Intellectual capital can be deﬁned as intellectual resources that have been “formalized,
captured and leveraged” to create assets of higher value (Prusak, 1998). IC refers to
intellectual material such as knowledge,
intellectual property and
experience that can be used to create wealth. Intangible assets are innately difﬁcult to
measure and include a large number of organizational and individual variables. Simple
ﬁnancial measures fail to take cognizance of the complex nature of these assets.

information,

IC can be classiﬁed as human capital, organizational capital and customer capital

(Bontis, 1996; Edvinsson and Sullivan, 1996; Roos and Roos, 1997; Stewart, 1995).

Human Capital refers to the accumulated value of investments in employee training,
competence, and future. The term focuses on the value of what the individual can
produce; human capital thus encompasses individual value in an economic sense

Intellectual
capital

389

Journal of Intellectual Capital
Vol. 5 No. 3, 2004
pp. 389-413
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
1469-1930
DOI 10.1108/14691930410550363

JIC
5,3

390

(Becker, 1992). Human Capital can be further sub-classiﬁed as, the employees’
competence, relationship ability and values. A simple example provided by Kindred
Pederson of Southern California Edison indicates that if a software package sells for
$1 million before employee modiﬁcations and $3 million after employee modiﬁcations,
then the human capital used to modify the software is $2 million.

Organizational capital is the supportive infrastructure that enables human capital
to function. Edvinsson and Malone (1997) further classify structural capital into
organizational, process and innovation capital. Organizational capital includes the
organization philosophy and systems for leveraging the organization’s capability.
Process capital includes the techniques, procedures, and programs that implement
and enhance the delivery of goods and services. Innovation capital includes intellectual
properties and intangible assets. An organization’s policy and procedures, customized
software applications, research and development programmes, training courses and
patents are examples of organizational capital.

Customer capital

is deﬁned as the combined value of the relationships with
customers, suppliers, industry associations and markets. Customer capital refers to
issues like trust and understanding and the strength and loyalty of customer relations.
Customer satisfaction, repeat business, ﬁnancial well-being, and price sensitivity may
be used as indicators of customer capital.

1.2 Beneﬁts of measurement of IC
is to measure the value of organizations knowledge assets, both
Our goal
organizational and human capital,
in order to justify investments in intellectual
capital. A key reason for measuring intellectual capital is to recognize hidden assets
and strategically develop them to achieve organizational goals.

The beneﬁts of IC measurement include the following.
Identiﬁcation and mapping of intangible assets.

.

. Recognition of knowledge ﬂow patterns within the organization.
. Prioritization of critical knowledge issues.
. Acceleration of learning patterns within the organization.
. Best practice identiﬁcation and diffusion across the ﬁrm, by presenting a strong

business case for the best practice.

. Constant monitoring of asset value and ﬁnding ways of increasing value.
Increased understanding of how knowledge creates interrelationships.

.

. Understanding organizational social networks and identifying change agents.

.

.

.

Increase in innovation.
Increase collaborative activities and a knowledge sharing culture as a result of
increased awareness of the beneﬁts of knowledge management.
Increased employee self-perception of the organization and increased motivation.

. Creates a performance-oriented culture.

Measurement of IC and knowledge management practices will result in signiﬁcant
beneﬁts to the organization that will help determine business strategy, process design
as well providing competitive advantage. While discussing all points mentioned above

Intellectual
capital

391

in detail is beyond the scope of this paper, a few case studies based on our personal
experience are in order.

1.3 Limitations of current measurement systems
A detailed literature study (Bontis, 2001) identiﬁed several limitations in the existing
measurement systems, which are as follows

. The existing approaches relate to the organization as a whole and do not account

for individual departments or knowledge workers.

. They do not balance past-orientation with future predictions, or quantitative

ﬁnancial measures with qualitative perceptual and process measures.

. Behavioral dynamics and its impact on organizational economics are not

. There is no system for measuring process effectiveness in capturing tacit

measured.

knowledge transfer.

The above limitations can be overcome by integrating ﬁnancial measures, with
perceptual, process and systems measures. Such an approach will account for every
individual department in the value chain and will also help to identify key factors,
which inﬂuence IC effectiveness or retard its growth. The existing measurement
systems are discussed below.

The existing measurement systems can be broadly classiﬁed as belonging to the
ﬁnancial or accounting framework or the perceptual school of thought. We further
classify the non-ﬁnancial and non-perceptual measurement systems as “other
measurement techniques”. We discuss the different measurement frameworks and
their limitations below. Table I summarizes this discussion and provides an overview
of the different measurement frameworks.

1.3.1 Financial measurement system. Financial measurement systems are a
classiﬁcation system for all IC measurement
techniques that address ﬁnancial
contributions made through IC assets Conventional cost accounting shows the costs of
individual production operations without connection to other activities, e.g. marketing,
service, etc. As production was the dominant activity, the results of all other activities
in a company were not registered separately, rather they were considered general
(indirect) costs. A small shift was made when activity-based costs (ABC) were
introduced. This represented certain advancement, as costs per individual activity
could be controlled in a better way and provided some sort of connection with the
whole. Regardless of this, the measuring system based on cost accounting has proved
totally inadequate for contemporary circumstances.

Financial statements fail to measure and show the “most signiﬁcant building blocks
of business”, which is the human capital, organizational capital, and customer capital.
As a result, these ﬁnancial statements fail to communicate about the state of the
business in terms of IC development to the management and investors. The current
accounting framework, which is transactional and realization based, only recognizes
the existence of an item when transactions with third parties take place (Brennan,
1999). This does not hold good for IC measurement.

Intangibles such as staff competencies, customer relationships, business models,
and computer and administrative systems receive no recognition in the traditional
ﬁnancial and reporting model. Interestingly, even traditional intangibles like brand

JIC
5,3

392

Table I.
The four schools of IC
measurement and
analysis of their
advantages and
disadvantages. Our
integrated framework is
based on these four
schools and results in an
effective IC measurement
system

Advantages

Disadvantages

Perceptual measures
Perceptions affect attitudes and behaviors

Culture is a measure of normative behaviors
Knowledge of employee perceptions can help
the organization design more acceptable
processes and bring about behavioral change
When used to measure perceptions of process
effectiveness, they can lead to continuous
process improvements
Process measures
Mapping and establishment of current
processes
Determination of process/system usefulness
and effectiveness (usability statistics)
Predict future performance/infrastructure
requirements
Lead to tangible beneﬁts in terms of
learning time and cycle time reduction
Financial measures
Provides the shareholders with a ﬁnancial
value of the organizations intangible assets
Clearly links spending on intangibles with
proﬁts
Measures like ROA and ROI, as well as KCV
provide for intangibles in the accounting
framework and justify spending on intangible
resources
By linking process and ﬁnancial the
organization can measure and improve its IC
effectiveness
Other measures
Social network measures determine the
optimum intangible resource allocation and
utilization required for increasing the rate of
innovation
Human capital value addition measures
determine the organizational processes that can
be improved to sustain and increase the human
capital value addition
Econometrics measures reveal tangible beneﬁts
and value of intangible assets and resources

Difﬁcult to establish causal relations, hence
cannot be generalized
Subjective in nature and hence lead to bias
Not correlated with performance and proﬁts

Too much formalism

Can be confusing when dealing with too
many knowledge domains
Can be effective only when knowledge
ﬂows are enabled across domains
Not linked to proﬁts or tangible
improvements

Too complex incorporates several variables
and cannot be standardized
May not be always possible to account for
earnings from intangible assets
Dependent on external factors such as market
exuberance

Does not take into consideration process and
people factors and cannot be used to identify
problem areas and design improvements

These measures do not consider individual
perceptions and hence may not result in the
requisite behavioral change

equity, patents, and goodwill are reported in the ﬁnancial statements only when they
meet stringent recognition criteria, otherwise they have, until recently been omitted
from the ﬁnancial statements (IFAC, 1998; IASC, 1998).

The limitations of the existing ﬁnancial reporting system for capital markets and
other stakeholders have motivated an evolving dialogue on ﬁnding new ways to
measure and report on a company’s IC. The product of this dialogue is a plethora of
new measurement approaches that all have the aim, to a greater or lesser extent, of

Intellectual
capital

393

synthesizing the ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial value-generating aspects of the company
into one external report. Principal among the new reporting models are the knowledge
production function (Machlup, 1962); the intangible asset monitor (Sveiby, 1997, 1998;
Celemi, 1999); the balanced scorecard (Kaplan and Norton, 1992, 1996); the skandia
value scheme (Edvinsson and Malone, 1997); the IC accounts (DATI, 1998); and the
knowledge capital scorecard (Lev, 2000). Each of these seminal works deﬁnes a
particular class of ﬁnancial reporting model. Table II provides a useful framework for
comparing several of the main ﬁnancial measurement approaches.

The “new” measurement frameworks have certain limitations. They do not factor in
the effect of human behavior and attitudes, social networks or the importance of tacit
knowledge transfer. The limitations of the current measurement systems will be
discussed in detail in the literature review section.

1.3.2 Perceptual Measurement Techniques. The perceptual school of thought
concentrates on employees’ perceptions and their need for an effective knowledge
management system Perceptual measures include employee perceptions of
top
management commitment, need for knowledge sharing and knowledge management,
perceptions of the value addition and of equitable reward structures. The perceptual
school of thought also emphasizes the role of organizational culture in inﬂuencing IC
value adding behaviors.

Analysis of organizational culture is essential for understanding knowledge ﬂow in
an organization. We deﬁne culture as the shared values, beliefs, and practices of the
people in the organization. Culture is reﬂected in the visible aspects of the organization,
such as its mission. It is embedded in the way people act, what they expect of each
other, and perceptions of other’s actions (Schein, 1996).

Clearly, behaviors determine that the organizations culture and employee attitudes
are important determinants of knowledge sharing behavior. For example, individuals
hold certain beliefs and in the process of socialization they share their beliefs and
this becomes tacit knowledge. When an individual externalizes those beliefs,
tacit knowledge becomes explicit
team knowledge (Nonaka and Konno, 1998).
This indicates the importance of individual knowledge worker perceptions and beliefs
and their importance with relation to value creation and value addition.

Developed by

Framework

Classiﬁcation model

Machlup (1962)

Knowledge production function

Sveiby (1988, 1997)

The intangible asset monitor

Kaplan and Norton (1992)

The balanced scorecard

Edvinsson and Malone (1997)

Skandia value scheme

Lev (2000)

Knowledge capital scorecard

Investments in knowledge capital
Production costs
Economic growth
Internal structure
External structure
Competence
Internal processes perspective
Customer perspective
Learning and growth perspective
Financial perspective
Human capital
Structural capital
Total earnings
Earnings from tangible assets
Knowledge capital earnings

Table II.
Frameworks for
classifying intellectual
capital reporting models

JIC
5,3

394

There is no standardized procedure to evaluate or determine how an organization’s
culture supports the IC development. Managers need a conceptual framework of the
links between culture and knowledge to design the interventions needed to create
behaviors that will support their knowledge management objectives (DeLong, 1997).
Current methodologies for culture assessments are correlational in nature, do not
provide causal relationships and therefore cannot be generalized.

The perceptual approach is inadequate as it focuses on individual levels of analysis
and it is uncorrelated with performance and proﬁt. It is a self-concept based approach
and could lead to subjective bias in the measurement of IC.

1.3.3 Other measurement techniques. Measurement techniques that cannot be
classiﬁed as purely ﬁnancial or perceptual fall under this category. They include
measures of social networks, process measures and systems measures. Several
in the literature review section.
measurement techniques are discussed in detail
A combination of ﬁnancial, perceptual and “other” measures will result in value adding
behaviors and resultant organizational effectiveness.

1.3.4 Motivation for the study and research objectives. Based on our analysis of
literature we are convinced that there is a need for a more holistic and integrated
approach to IC measurement that will result in measurement of systems, processes
and people issues and their impact on the organizations’ proﬁts Table III shows a
brief review of literature, research gaps found and the need for further research.
Speciﬁc measurement techniques will be discussed in detail in the literature review
section.

The measurement gap analysis detailed above and our extensive literature survey
shows that there is a need for a more integrated and holistic approach to IC
measurement. The new approach must result in measurement of systems processes and
people issues and their impact on the organizations’ proﬁts. We believe that the
measures and tools developed in this paper will enable managers to harness and develop
an organization’s IC in a more accurate and proactive way than currently possible.

This paper attempts to achieve the following objectives.
. To identify how IC is measured and reported.
. To assess the current measurement techniques against the needs of knowledge

intensive organizations.

. To propose an integrated and holistic methodology towards IC measurement,
which can be used as a diagnostic and also as a tool for ﬁnancial decisions.

2. Methodology framework
Over 100 papers on measurement techniques and theories on intellectual capital were
reviewed and analyzed. Figure 1 presents the methodology ﬂow chart.

We studied over 100 papers on IC management, which modeled IC effectiveness and
also presented ﬁnancial, perceptual, process and other techniques for IC measurement.
We then short listed methodologies that were of interest to us in our organization,
using the following criteria: practicability, theoretical validation and measurement
effectiveness regarding its impact on bottom line results. Speciﬁc ﬁnancial, perceptual,
and process and other measures were then identiﬁed and selected to provide an
integrated IC measurement framework. The next phase involved design of speciﬁc
stage wise techniques for IC management and measurement. The stages include needs

Year

Findings

Further research

Author

Penrose

Machlup

Bass

Hinings et al.

Basili

1959 Organization as a knowledge

repository

1962 Knowledge production and

distribution in American
Society and the importance of
knowledge work and the
knowledge worker

1969 Bass diffusion model describes

the empirical adoption curve

1974 Work-based learning is a key
practice in transforming
organizational practice –
power resources are traded
away

1984 Basili put forward the Goal

Question Metrics Paradigm for
continuous process
improvements

Karl Sveiby

1986 Need for behavioral perspective

as an addition to intangible
assets monitor

Prahalad and Hamel

1990

Core competency theory- path
breaking

McAteer

Nelson and Winter

Hall

Foucault

Davenport

Nonaka and Takeuchi

1991

Four characteristics of high
value adding perceptions:
accelerate learning, framework
for testing innovation, reduce
risk, link between process and
results, reduce costs
1992 Knowledge stored as

predictable behavioral patterns

1992

Communication processes and
capacity building measures
help manage intellectual capital

1994 Managing knowledge is not

just an issue of technology but
managing social relations also
1995 Knowledge – ideas, skills and
expertise can be captured and
shared

Need for studying
organizations knowledge
Empirical impetus to
knowledge production

To ﬁt the Bass curve as a
process, outcome measure of
adaptability
What does it entail? And how
should it be brought about?

The paradigm is perceptual
process in nature and there is
need for further work in terms
of tangible measures for
process improvements and
linking them to ﬁnancial
beneﬁts
Good tool for ﬁnancial
appraisal of intangibles, but
does not help in understanding
employee perception of value
addition and increasing it
Specialist knowledge alone,
does not consider
organizational capital and tacit
generalist knowledge
Importance of the possible
relations between process
effectiveness measures and
perceptual measures leading to
more effective IC management

Impetus for exploring human
capital value addition

consideration
Clearer understanding of
communication processes and
their importance
Evidence related to importance
of people, yet no speciﬁc
measures of value addition
What is the most effective way
of doing that? How does it
contribute to value addition?

(continued)

1992 Resource based view of the ﬁrm Does not take people into

Intellectual
capital

395

Table III.
Representing the
literature surveyed,
important ﬁndings and
research gaps

JIC
5,3

396

Author

McGrath

Senn

APQC

DiMattia and Oder

Philips

Ginchereau

Edvinsson and Mallone

1998

Sieloff and Shih

Tobin

Year

Findings

Further research

No theories for organizational
knowledge management

Important for IT management
to understand the
characteristics and behaviors of
high performing IT personnel
Need for a holistic model that
incorporates ﬁnancial,
perceptual, process and social
measures

Need for knowledge capture
and leverage through effective
human capital management

Need to integrate it and
technology performance with
processes, people factors and
ﬁnancial returns

Financial rather than a
behavioral parameter. Difﬁcult
to improve performance and
design diagnostics
Does not explore the direct
relationships between rewards
innovation and performance.
Need for a holistic optimal
model for value addition

Need for incorporating
perceptual and systems
measures in IC valuation

1996 KM for strategy and

1997

innovation – important, but
inadequate studies
1996 Top performing information
technology (IT) professionals
with needed specialized skills
are in short supply
Lasting organizational change
is dependent on cultural
change; and requires formal
education and training,
communication, infrastructure
and ﬁnancial incentives
Findings show that
organizations have lost a lot of
information and expertise
through loss of people

1997

1997 Return on investment on
knowledge assets

1997 Usability statistics for

knowledge management IT
solutions. Ginchereau.B
devised performance measures
for Knowledge Management
systems and used them to
compare different Knowledge
Management technologies
Intellectual capital theory and
ﬁrst organizational application

1998 HP culture selects and rewards

loyal employees (those who share
and contribute). Has had a steady
growth rate of 20 percent, while
start up have higher turn over.
Training is important to build
knowledge capital
1998 The knowledge enabled

organization uses the knowledge
and skills of all employees,
regardless of level or function. It
provides tools and opportunities
to share knowledge. Employee
perception of the same may be a
determinant of contribution.
Organizations use only 10
percent of employee knowledge
– need for efﬁcient systems

Table III.

(continued)

Author

Warren

Warren

Meyer

Year

Findings

Further research

Intellectual
capital

397

Does not indicate factors
involved in people value
addition

Need to explore knowledge
worker perceptions and design
programs and systems to
overcome these barriers
Need for a more detailed study
of perceptions and behaviors of
organizational factors leading
to value addition

Need to understand the exact
relationships, organizational
dynamics and social networks

McAdam and McCreedy

1999 Rated knowledge transfer,

Chug

Harvey and Lusch

1999 Have an effective KM support
system which is seen to
facilitate value addition
1999 Attempt to evaluate the

Explore the relations between
knowledge management
systems and IC Value
Diagnostic tool for
measurement of human capital

Dell and Mcdormott

2000

Need to evaluate perceptions of
culture and its relation to value
addition to the organization

Mayo

2000 The need to create a value

Need to create a theoretical
model to understand value
addition

(continued)

Table III.

1999 APQC study stating that

though technology may be
necessary for KM, it is not
sufﬁcient. People value
addition is important
1999 Biggest barrier to knowledge

sharing are cultural factors that
holding information is more
valuable than sharing it
1999 Unsupportive cultures, where

knowledge sharing is not
considered a value added
activity, leads to low
knowledge sharing
behaviors

learning, core-competencies,
knowledge capture and
dissemination, education,
experience, and culture as
issues related to knowledge
intensive organization. Tacit
knowledge is perceived by
81 percent of the sample as
being captured by informal
discussions

liability side of intangible
assets but did not touch the
people element. The “great
divide” is around the question:
“is this activity/person
contributing positively to
future value creation or not?”
Companies successful in
promoting knowledge sharing
culture, adapt their KM
approach to ﬁt their culture.
Visible link between knowledge
sharing and problem-solving.
Knowledge sharing is built
around networks people use in
daily work

adding chain, and to see where
the individual ﬁts into it

Author

Year

Findings

Further research

Goshal et al.

2000

JIC
5,3

398

Chong et al.

Need to look at process
variables that go towards
creating IC Value

Employee perceptions of these
factors need to be understood
and integrated into a holistic
theory for value addition

3M-innovation and NPD,
Enron creates value through
culture change. Case studies
of value creating
organizations

2000 A key element in value addition

is knowledge codiﬁcation and
sharing. It beneﬁts the
organization better
decision-making, more efﬁcient
staff. Knowledge investments
are not adding value because of
the low organizational
environments disabling
competency sharing. Formal
frameworks would be
beneﬁcial to link between
internal resources and
company performance; to close
the gap between the level of
expectations of senior
managers and the level of
delivery of projects
2000 Degree of learning are now

deployed by organizations as
components of reward
systems-effect efﬁciencies in
individual and organizational
performance

2000 Management initiatives could
be used to increase ﬁrm
functioning and productivity,
through increased employee
value-add. Many elements of
employee value
addition- network,
perceptions, behavioral
competencies and attitudes are
not included in competency
frameworks

2000 Measures for organizational

architecture and performance
based on social network
analysis

processes should factor in an
understanding of where and
how knowledge plays a role in
the performance of the process

Importance of learning and
reward delineated, and to be
integrated in a model for
increasing value addition

Perceived and expressed need
for a behavioral model and tool
to understand and assess these
competencies

Possible correlations with
processes and outcomes

Understand processes that
facilitate knowledge sharing
and creation as well as value
addition

Garrick and Clegg

Campbell

Carley

Nickols

2000 Design or redesign of business

Table III.

(continued)

Author

Iske

Year

Findings

Further research

2001 The value potential of

knowledge and the importance
of context, ease of transfer and
usage

Kannan and Akhilesh

2001 Human capital knowledge

value addition, a perceptual
process diagnostic of
knowledge value addition

Knowledge value potential
coupled with ROI and process
and systems measures can give
an accurate estimate of IC
development
Possibility of linking value
addition diagnostics to
ﬁnancial outcomes and process
measures

Intellectual
capital

399

Table III.

Figure 1.
Methodology ﬂow chart

analysis measures, systems measures, process measures and outcome measures. Needs
analysis refer to the measurement of organizational readiness for knowledge
management and IC development and the employees perceived needs towards IC
in nature and involve people and their
practice. The measures are perceptual
perceptions of organizational processes. Systems measures refer to performance of
technology for knowledge management. Process measures involve the measurement of
process effectiveness and outcome measures refer to the tangible and intangible
outcomes resulting from IC. Outcome measures include ﬁnancial measures and
social measures. Existing measurement techniques are incorporated into the above
framework. Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of IC measurement frameworks
as presented in this paper.

JIC
5,3

400

Figure 2.
Graphical representation
of IC measurement
frameworks that can be
classiﬁed as perceptual,
ﬁnancial, process and
other

3. Survey of literature
Over 100 papers on intellectual capital research and practice were analyzed.
The literature surveyed included ﬁnancial and accounting measurement techniques,
perceptual measures, process and systems measures, social networks analysis
techniques, and econometric techniques for intangibles measurement. The
framework is described in Figure 3 and the advantages and
measurement
limitations of each measurement “type” are presented in Table III.

We discuss in detail about the seminal studies and popular frameworks for IC
measurement, their drawback in general and the need for an integrated framework
has been presented in Section 2. Hence we focus on drawbacks of speciﬁc measurement
techniques in this section. We will present a detailed analysis of goal-question-metrics
paradigm (GQM) (Basili and Perricone, 1984, Basili and Musa, 1991, Basili et al.
1994; Bhatt, 2000), the intangibles assets monitor (Sveiby, 1996, 1998; Bontis, 2001),

Intellectual
capital

401

Skandia framework (Edvinsson and Malone, 1997; Sveiby, 1998; Bontis, 2001),
Bagelleri’s R&D measures, (Bagelieri, 1997, 2000), knowledge capital value (Lev, 2000;
Stewart, 2001), human capital value added (Kannan and Akhilesh, 2002), carnegie
measures of knowledge architecture and performance (Carley et al., 2000), economic
value added (Bontis, 1999; Starssman, 1999; Sveiby, 2001,West, 1999), organizational
culture (Argyris, 1982; DeLong, 1997; Denison, 1982, Schein, 1996), return on
investment, (Phillips, 1997), knowledge value potential (Iske and Boekhoff, 2001),
knowledge production function (Machlup, 1962; Swanstrom, 2001), and learning and
diffusion curves (Lam, 2000; Roth, 1995; Swanstrom, 2001; Watkins, 2001).

The literature reviewed is classiﬁed as ﬁnancial, perceptual, perceptual process and

other measures as shown in Figure 3.

3.1 Perceptual measures
Perceptual measures, as discussed in Section 1.3.2, focus on employee perceptions of
the current practices and the beneﬁts garnered through them. Perceptual measures
have several limitations, as discussed in Section 1.3.2, but are still important as they
can help to clarify possible barriers to IC effectiveness. Needs analysis, cultural
analysis and commitment measures are perceptual measures, which are essential for
understanding the organization’s readiness for knowledge management activities and
commitment to IC development and leverage.

3.1.1 Needs analysis. The success of a KM implementation program depends upon
the organizations readiness and acceptance of the program. Any change can be
brought about only through the organizations awareness of the need for change,
acceptance of it and cooperation and commitment to it. This is possible only when the
change agent has a clear understanding of the members’ needs. Thus, the ﬁrst step in
the process would be to carry out a needs analysis (APQC, 2001; Hylton, 2002).

Needs analysis is the measurement process which reviews and maps organizational
information need, creation, use, ﬂow, and storage; identiﬁes gaps, duplication, costs;
and value; and uncovers the barriers to effective knowledge ﬂow. The analysis is used
to investigate the company’s knowledge environment, ecology, knowledge use and
sharing and most importantly the employees’ perceptions of knowledge management
effectiveness (Hylton, 2002).

Needs analysis involves questionnaire-based studies of employee perceptions of
knowledge management initiatives, knowledge sharing within the organization,
knowledge criticality and prioritization. Mind mapping tools are used for knowledge
management needs analysis (Sprotte, 2000).

Figure 3.
A standard bass curve for
diffusion of innovations
over time

JIC
5,3

402

Needs analysis has been established as an important ﬁrst step in an IC or knowledge
management exercise (APQC, 2000; Swanstrom, 2001; Von Hippel, 2001). However, its
perceptual nature can lead to subjective bias and there is a need to integrate it with
other systems and process measures as well as ﬁnancial analysis, in order to estimate
the effectiveness of needs analysis exercises.

3.1.2 Cultural analysis. The success of any KM initiative depends upon an
environment which motivates people to communicate, collaborate, innovate, take risks,
and share and re-use knowledge. Equally important are appropriate skills,
competences and behaviours. Fundamentals like values,
trust, beliefs and
organizational politics dictate success or failure of KM interventions, so to add real
value, the KM initiative must address the existing corporate culture and sub-cultures.
Social processes and organizational structures (including self-forming groups)
facilitate the conversion of information to knowledge, and the sharing, distribution
and creation of knowledge. Other social processes like change management, managing
complexity, communities of practice/interest, organizational
learning, narrative,
visioning etc. are also important and need to be accounted for in KM interventions
(Davenport and Prusak, 1998; Guerteen, 1999).

Sustained knowledge management requires the establishment of an organizational
memory that is ﬂexible and adaptive to changing requirements. This is best achieved
by a strong organizational culture that emphasizes knowledge sharing by the use of
various communication channels (Lemkin, 2000). An analysis of knowledge culture is
thus recommended.

The results from the analysis of knowledge culture might show cultural barriers
that need to be addressed. A supportive environment is the most critical factor for the
success of KM projects (Davenport and Prusak, 1998) and should be given high
priority.

The cultural factors affecting organizational change have been undervalued, and
cultural/behavioristic implementations have shown some beneﬁts. But the cause-effect
relationship between cultural strategy and business beneﬁts is not clear, because the
“Hawthorne Effect” may come into play, and because we still cannot make dependable
predictions about systems as complex as knowledge-based business organizations.
Positive results achieved by cultural/behavioristic strategies may not be sustainable,
measurable, cumulative, or replicable (Barclay and Murray, 1997).

3.1.3 Commitment measures. Commitment to IC development and knowledge
sharing are essential for the success of any knowledge management initiative.
Commitment needs to be both attitudinal and behavioral. A high employee and
management commitment will result in increased leverage of knowledge. Quinn and
Sydney (1996) deﬁned IC as commitment £ competence and emphasized on the
importance of commitment for IC development. Building commitment
involves
engaging employees’ emotional energy and attention. It is reﬂected in how employees
relate to each other and feel about a ﬁrm (Ulrich, 1998).

Theory and research from literature provides a framework for understanding
employee commitment behaviors (Ulrich et al., 1989). Research indicates that
employees perception of demands versus the available resources, affects their coping
and commitment behaviors. Imbalance of demands and resources results in low
commitment behaviors (Hamel and Prahalad, 1994). Once demands and resources are
balanced, employees can contribute. They are committed to improve and competent

enough to make the right
(Ulrich, 1998).

improvements. Their intellectual capital

increases

Commitment may be measured along the following criteria.

.

Is there an expressed positive attitude towards the project?

. Are positive commitment behaviors exhibited?
. Are value adding behaviors exhibited? Such as initiative taking behaviors,

contributions to IP/IC, knowledge sharing and problem-solving, etc.

Intellectual
capital

403

3.2 Perceptual-process metrics
Perceptual-process metrics refer to measurement techniques that combine process
measurements with employee perceptions of their effectiveness. Perceptual-process
measures are more enhanced and holistic than traditional perceptual measures. They
can be used as diagnostics. Perceptual-process measures are, however, limited to
measures of process improvements and do not provide deﬁnitive social or ﬁnancial
implications. The goal question metrics, usability statistics, human capital knowledge
value added are some of the perceptual-process measures we discuss in this paper.

3.2.1 Goal/question/metrics paradigm. GQM is a widely used perceptual framework
for measuring IC, that is process oriented and focuses on diagnostics and deliverables
and is used to determine process efﬁciency (Basili and Perricone, 1984). The GQM
approach involves experts and involves three steps: deﬁning goals for the desired state
of knowledge management in a speciﬁc domain, deﬁning questions on processes and
ﬁnally deﬁning metrics. GQM deﬁnes the goal of measurement in concise terms using
ﬁve facets: analysis of object (process/product under study), purpose, focus (quality
attribute of the object, e.g. reliability), viewpoint and environment (context). The goals
are translated into speciﬁc questions, which allow a veriﬁcation of success. Questions
are reﬁned through suitable metrics, thus making it possible to control the success of
the process. The metrics for each question are deﬁned by asking for information
speciﬁc to the question. Data collection procedures are deﬁned for each metric. Data are
then collected, validated and analyzed and feedback provided to the process team.

The GQM model helps in integrating knowledge management with organizational
processes, provides assistance in performing knowledge management activities,
comparison of knowledge management processes for designing interfaces between
virtual
teams and also for inter-organizational knowledge transfer. The GQM
framework tracks how the KM system reaches the goals and monitors the processes in
detail.

The limitations of the GQM model are that it is process focused and does not
address people issues or ﬁnancial outcomes. A potential danger is the possibility of
making KM include too much formalism. The process-oriented view is confusing as it
deals with several knowledge domains. While knowledge domains are a means of
splitting this complexity, the linking between them is important. KM can only be fully
effective when knowledge ﬂows are enabled across organizational divisions or units.
Further, the value addition provided through the speciﬁc process improvements is not
measured in monetary terms or linked to organizational performance.

3.2.2 Usability statistics. Usability statistics refer to the ease of usage of processes
and technologies for IC leverage and knowledge management. The measurement
criteria according to Ginchereau et al. (1997) include the following.

JIC
5,3

404

. Performance: refers to ease of implementation, ease of maintenance, ease of
information transfer,

administration, ease of analysis and usage, ease of
dissemination and distribution.

. Documentation: refers to technological support provided by the tool to facilitate

documentation.

. Technical support: refers to the availability of technical support staff for

clariﬁcations and maintenance.

3.2.3 Human capital knowledge value addition. Human capital knowledge value
addition (HCKVA) is a perceptual-process measurement technique that is used to
determine the organizational factors that contribute to employee performance. It acts
as a diagnostic and can be used to monitor process change and enhancements, to
develop human capital potential. Ability development, quitting consequences,
knowledge access and rewards were identiﬁed as the most important determinants
of employee value addition. The limitation of this measure is that it does not link
performance behavior and processes to ﬁnancial outcome measures.

3.2.4 Systems performance measures. System performance measures are broadly
divided into two categories, system, and output measures System metrics measure the
general health of the system. For example, number of page hits, number of visitors,
response times. Output measures are core day-to-day activity measures. Example, turn
around time, percent complete on time, turn over rate, retention.

Systems measures contain too much detail and may not always explain the
behaviors. They measure a part of the “what”, but not much of the “why”. Systems
measures do not determine the means to create customer value, or how internal
knowledge assets improve that value.

3.2.5 Skandia navigator. Skandia is considered to be the ﬁrst large company to have
made a truly coherent effort at measuring knowledge assets (Bontis, 1996; Huseman and
Goodman, 1999). The navigator has four areas of focus: process, customer, ﬁnancial,
renewal and development and human capital (Edvinsson and Malone, 1997). The
Skandia model uses 91 IC metrics plus 73 traditional metrics to measure the ﬁve focus
areas mentioned above (Bontis, 2001). Edvinsson and Malone (1997) acknowledge that
various IC indices may be redundant but still recommend 112 measures in the navigator.
The Skandia model does not assign a dollar value to IC, but uses proxy measures to track
trends in assumed value added (Lynn, 1998). The metrics used are subjective in nature
and cannot be generalized (Roos and Roos, 1997). They also emphasized that the balance
sheet approach followed by the Skandia model results in a snap shot view and does not
represent the dynamic knowledge ﬂows in an organization.

Financial measurement systems do overcome problems of subjective bias and
reliability. We present key ﬁnancial measures and their limitations in the next section.

3.3 Financial measures
Financial measures as discussed in Section 1.3.1 focus on the ﬁnancial outcomes of IC
investment. Some examples of ﬁnancial measurement techniques are the intangibles
assets monitor, economic value added (EVA), the knowledge capital valuation method,
knowledge production function, return on investment and knowledge value potential.
Sveiby’s intangibles assets monitor scorecard approach presents three distinct
IC: external and internal structure, and individuals’ competence.

indicators of

Intellectual
capital

405

The indicators examine growth, renewal, efﬁciency, and stability/risk in each of these
categories. External structure consists of relationships with customers and suppliers,
brand names, and reputation. Internal structure consists of patents, concepts, models,
systems and culture. These are created by the employees and are thus generally
“owned” by the organization. Individual competence is people’s ability to act in various
situations. It includes skill, education, experience, and values.

The IAM method provides a scorecard of the company’s intellectual capital
strengths and weaknesses. However, it does not result in an overall quantiﬁable value.
Sveiby assumes that IC and ﬁnancial outcomes are innately related. Lynn (1998) argues
that value creation is not possible without appropriate support for ﬁnancial feedback
systems and more importantly a supportive culture. IAM does not provide quantitative
measures of IC value addition or ROI.

Economic value added is a comprehensive performance measure, proposed by
Stewart (1997), that uses the variables of capital budgeting, ﬁnancial planning, goal
setting, performance measurement, shareholder communication, and incentive
compensation to account for all ways in which corporate value can be added or lost
(Bontis, 1999). In simple terms EVA is a measure of surplus value created on an
investment.

EVA is calculated by subtracting capital charges, taxes and operating expenses
from the net sales. Capital charges refer to the charges generated on an asset over
a period of one year. Operating expenses are the money expended on running the
operation for a period of one year. Net sales refer to the total volume of sales in a given
ﬁnancial year. The formula for calculating EVA is presented in equation (1).

Net sales 2 operating expenses 2 taxes 2 capital charges ¼ EVA

ð1Þ

EVA does not add to the understanding of the organizations intangible resources or
their speciﬁc contributions to the organizations effectiveness. EVA uses 164 areas of
performance adjustments, leading a trade off between complexity, accuracy and ease.
The large list of possible variables for EVA measurement make it nonstandard and
difﬁcult to compare. There is little conclusive empirical evidence on the accuracy of
EVA measures.

Price to book value. The most common method for measuring knowledge assets is
to subtract a company’s book value from its market value and arrive at its IC worth.
The price to book ratio compares two different types of valuations:

(1)
(2)

the stock market’s valuation as reﬂected in the stock’s price, and
the accountant’s valuation as measured by book value.

Speciﬁcally, the price to book ratio is market capitalization divided by shareholder’s
equity. The shortcoming of the “market to book value” method is that the number rises
and falls with market exuberance (Starssman, 1999).

Knowledge capital scorecard method proposed by Lev (2000) is performance driven
and makes it possible to assess the worth of organizational knowledge. The value of IC
is dependent on the earnings of the organization and accounts for earnings from
intangible assets. The difference between the total earnings and earnings from tangible
assets is termed knowledge capital earnings (KCE). The knowledge capital is then
calculated by dividing the earnings by an expected rate of return on knowledge assets.
The formula for calculating knowledge capital value (KCV) is shown in equation (2).

JIC
5,3

406

KCV ¼ normalized earnings 2 earnings from tangible assets=

ð2Þ

knowledge capital discount rate

where normalized earning refers to: earnings adjusted for cyclical ups and downs in the
economy; earnings from tangible assets refers to the ﬁnancial earnings; and knowledge
capital discount rate refers to average after-tax proﬁts of: software and biotechnology
industries – 10.5 percent. By inserting it in the formula, one can put a dollar ﬁgure on a
company’s knowledge capital.

The strength of the method is its predictive capacity. Empirical studies show a
strong correlation 0.53 between return from stocks and knowledge earnings (Stewart,
2001). Another study in the chemical industry, spanning over 83 companies and 25
years, shows that R&D investments returned 25.9 percent pre-tax, whereas capital
spending earned just 15 percent. The major drawback of the knowledge capital
valuation method is that the variables measured by the Knowledge Capital Valuation
method are futuristic.

The knowledge production function refers to knowledge measured by R&D
investment and patents. Knowledge production function is the relationship of
investment in knowledge capital towards the reduction of production costs and
increased economic growth. Machlup (1962) deﬁned knowledge production as any
human activity that is effectively designed to create, alter, conﬁrm a meaningful
appreciation, awareness or cognizance of one’s own or others experiences or ideas.
Knowledge production function is measured as a function of the sum total of individual
knowledge and learning the organizational knowledge and is described in equation (3).

Q ¼ f ðK; L; Kn ¼ f ðK; LÞÞ:

ð3Þ

where, K refers to natural knowledge; L refers to learning; and Kn ¼ organizational
knowledge.

The knowledge production function is the most basic and fundamental metric
towards measurement of the value of organizational knowledge. However, it does not
answer the fundamental question “will it make money?” Philips proposed the return on
investment measure monitor the economic returns from a knowledge investment.

Return on investment refers to a systematic means to determine a monetary ﬁgure
to how results compare to costs. ROI is used for evaluating IC investments as
proﬁtable. An example being training.

ROI is calculated as a percentage of the ratio between the net beneﬁts derived from a
process or knowledge system and the total costs expended and is shown in the
equation (4).

ROI % ¼

Net benefits
Total costs £ 100

:

ð4Þ

ROI measures help determine the value of the contribution of a process, system or
individual, prioritize programs, improve processes and focus on results. ROI measures
can also be used for enlisting management support and changing employee
perceptions. However, ROI measures are expensive and time-consuming.

The next section describes measurement techniques that are used to understand the
effect of social factors and are classiﬁed as “other techniques” for the purpose of this
paper.

Intellectual
capital

407

3.4 Other measures
Other measures refer to a variety of measurement techniques that do not fall under the
classiﬁcation of perceptual, process or ﬁnancial. They include measures of social
networks, econometrics measures like learning and diffusion curves, and knowledge
value potential measures.

Social outcome measures refer to processes and social networks which affect
knowledge sharing and generation. These include social network measures, ROI of
communities of practice, learning curves, diffusion curves, etc.

Social network measures refer to measures of interpersonal networks and authority
structures (Carley et al., 2000; Galbraith, 1973; Thompson, 1967). Examples of social
network measures are presented below:

where i ¼ 1 j ¼ 1

Span of control: average number of lower links per manager
Density: the number of actual links in a network divided by the number of all
possible links in the network
Density ¼ NN/S ij
Cognitive load is a measure of commitment network.
Cognitive load is a measure of commitment network.
Cognitive load: deﬁned for each person
Number of people person i interacts with/total number of people in the group;
Number of resources person i manages/total number of resources
Number of tasks person i is assigned to/total number of tasks
sum of number of resources required by the tasks person i does/(total number of

sum of number of people who do the same tasks person i does/(total number of

sum of negotiation needs person i needs to do for each task/total possible

tasks * total number of resources)

tasks * total number of people)

negotiations

Resource load: average number of resources each individual has access to.

Skill complexity is a product of the number of people and number of available
Social and interpersonal network measures determine intangible resources allocation
and utilization in the organization and affect the rate of innovation in an organization.
Rate of innovation can be measured based on the time taken from invention to
replacement of an old technique and the value added by the new technique
(Swanstrom, 2001).

Learning costs associated with new technologies and innovations can be reduced
through effective processes. Reduction in learning costs can be measured through
learning curves. The learning curve represents natural knowledge production cost
reduction without intervention (Abernathy and Wayne, 1974).

Organizations can reduce learning costs and increase diffusions through use of
efﬁcient knowledge management systems. Learning and diffusion curves should be
applied to knowledge management tools and processes to determine the value add
created by them (Watkins, 2001).

JIC
5,3

408

Diffusion curves track the diffusion and adoption of new ideas, processes, and
products, i.e. Innovations and are based on aggregates of people. A small number of
early adopters evaluate and accept an innovation, which then spreads rapidly across
the organization (Nielsen, 1995).

The curve typically has an S shape and is called the S curve as a result (Mahajan

et al., 1990). Figure 3 presents the diffusion curve.

Many factors, including, opinion leaders, knowledge base, adoption of another
innovation, ability to forget the innovations being replaced and technology, govern the
rate of diffusion.

Diffusion may be measured using the formula presented in equation (5).

N t ¼ N t21 þ pðm 2 N t21Þ þ q

ðm 2 N t21Þ

ð5Þ

N t21
m

Where, m is the market potential, the total number of people who will eventually use
the product, is the p the coefﬁcient of external inﬂuence, the likelihood that somebody
who is not yet the using the product will start using it because of mass media
coverage or other external factors, q the coefﬁcient of internal inﬂuence, the likelihood
that somebody who is not yet using the product will start using it because of
“word-of-mouth” or other inﬂuence from those already using the product.

Managers intervene to compress the diffusion curve by conducing a cultural
change, economic analysis and knowledge base analysis of the opinion leaders and
then design an intervention to address the individual preferences for the packaging of
innovations and the packaging of the knowledge. Increasing perceptions of a relative
advantage and cost savings can inﬂuence diffusion of an innovation.

The next step in the evolution of IC measurement factors in the potential value of

knowledge.

Knowledge value potential. Paul Iske in 2001 proposed a measure of knowledge value

potential, which helps in making investment decisions and planning for IC growth.

Iske deﬁnes the value of knowledge as the difference between the value of the
end-state and that of the original state. The original state refers to the context in which
knowledge is being measured and the transition process is the end state. The primary
thesis being that value of knowledge is context dependent.

Knowledge value potential equals the sum of the probability that knowledge is
related to a context, and is multiplied by the ease of transfer and the ease of usage and
context speciﬁc value addition and is shown in equation (6).

V PðKðVÞÞ ¼

pðKðVÞ; GÞ rðKðVÞ; GÞ aðKðVÞ; GÞ V ðK; GÞ

X

h
(cid:3)
V P LG

þ

i ðKðVÞ; ViÞ

(cid:4)

(cid:3)
2 I LG

(cid:4)
i ðKðVÞ; ViÞ

io

ð6Þ

Xn

l

i

Knowledge value potential can be directly applied to KM systems such as yellow
pages, smart documents. The effective exchange between two persons must be
measured according to the presence of trust, communication skills, language (barriers)
motivation, the prevalence of not-invented-here syndrome and shared mental models.
The success of a knowledge management system depends heavily on these issues.
The identiﬁcation, transfer and activation of knowledge across contexts determines the

Intellectual
capital

409

value added. Hence, the value of knowledge is not the intrinsic property of an
organization but
the
measurement. Knowledge potential is context dependent and affected by social factors,
interaction and sharing behaviors.

is dependent on the environment and the objectives of

4. The proposed framework
Perceptual, ﬁnancial, process and other techniques of IC measurement were discussed
in the previous section and a clear need established for an integrated holistic
framework for IC measurement that combines elements of perceptual, process,
ﬁnancial and social impact of IC. We present an IC measurement framework that
addresses issues of organizational growth and economic success.

Rather than follow the general deﬁnition of IC given above, we restrict ourselves for
the purposes of the study to the OECD deﬁnition of IC, which describes IC as “the
economic value of two categories of the intangible assets of a company: organizational
and human capital” (OECD, 1999). We discuss in detail, measurement frameworks for
human and organizational capital, thus capturing the people, process and technology
aspects of IC valuation. Customer capital or social networks are only captured via
debrieﬁng forms, to include social IC valuation, albeit to a limited degree. In addition,
we include ﬁnancial measures to correlate the traditional OEC framework with
bottomline performance measures.

We propose a three-step model for IC measurement. The three steps include:
identiﬁcation and awareness, systems and output measures, and outcome measures of
tangible ﬁnancial returns (Figure 4).

4.1 Knowledge management readiness: the ﬁrst step towards measurement of IC
KM awareness measures the organizations awareness and readiness for knowledge
identiﬁes
management,
core-competencies and establishes knowledge criticality. This step also includes
culture audits.

the extent of employee and management

involvement,

Systems and process are the diagnostic stage, where current system and
process effectiveness is measured. This includes existing frameworks such as the
goal-question paradigm and process efﬁciency measures as well as usability statistics.

Figure 4.
The new paradigm –
a three-step process
oriented approach to IC
valuation

JIC
5,3

410

This step involves current status assessment and indicators for future enhancement or
change. The processes and systems are then linked to basic effectiveness standards and
ﬁnancial and social outcomes in the next step.

The IC outcome measures link the various organizational processes and systems to
speciﬁc ﬁnancial and social outcomes. These measures can be at two levels: the project
level or the global organizational
level. They include measures of ROI, ROA,
knowledge productivity function, learning curves, etc. Detailed descriptions of each
step and analysis are not within the scope of this paper.

Note
1. A knowledge intensive organization is one in which experts make up at least one-third of the

organization (Starbuck, 1996).

References
Abernathy, W.J. and Wayne, K. (1974), “Limits of the learning curve”, Harvard Business Review,

Vol. 52 No. 5, pp. 109-19.

APQC (2000), APQC’s Best-Practice Report: Successfully Implementing Knowledge Management,.
APQC (2001), APQC: The Leading Edge of Knowing, American Productivity and Quality Center.
Argyris, C. (1982), Reasoning, Learning, and Action: Individual and organizational, Jossey-Bass,

San Francisco, CA.

Bagelieri, E. (1997), “R&D performance measurement: a reference model”, 7th international

Forum on Technology Management, Kyoto.

Bagelieri, E. (2000), “Linking share holder value to R&D Performance”, IAMOT Conference,

Barclay, R.O. and Murray, P.C. (1997), What is Knowledge Management, available at: www.

Miami.

media-access.com/whatis.html

Basili, V.R. and Musa, J. (1991), “The future engineering of software: a management perspective”,

IEEE Computer, Vol. 24 No. 9, pp. 90-6.

Basili, V.R. and Perricone, B.T.

(1984), “Software errors and complexity: an empirical

investigation”, Commun. ACM, Vol. 27 No. 1, pp. 42-52.

Basili, V.R., Daskalantonakis, M. and Yacobellis, R. (1994), “Technology transfer at Motorola”,

IEEE Software, Vol. 11 No. 2, pp. 70-6.

Becker, G. (1992), Economic Way of Looking at Life, Nobel Lecture, 9 December.
Bhatt, G.D. (2000), “Organizing knowledge in the knowledge development cycle”, Journal of

Knowledge Management, Vol. 4 No. 1.

Bontis, N. (1996), “There’s a price on your head: managing intellectual capital strategically”,

Business Quarterly.

Bontis, N. (1999), “Assessing knowledge assets: a review of the models uses to measure

intellectual capital”, International Journal of Management Reviews, Vol. 3 No. 1.

Bontis, N. (2001), “Assessing knowledge assets: a review of the models used to measure
intellectual capital”, International Journal of Management Reviews, Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 41-60.
Brennan, B. (1999), “Measuring and reporting intellectual capital”, available at: www.oecd.org
Carley, K.M., Yuqing, R. and David, K. (2000), “Measuring and modeling change in C 3 I
architecture”, Proceedings of the 2000 Command and Control Research and Technology
Symposium, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA.

Intellectual
capital

411

Celemi (1999), Growing A Knowledge Company, available at: www.celemi.com, site includes

DATI – Danish Agency for Trade and Industry (1998), Intellectual Capital: A New Tool for

celemi intangible assets monitor.

Companies, DTI council, Copenhagen.

Davenport, T.H. and Prusak, L. (1998), Working Knowledge: How Organizations Manage What

They Know, Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, MA.

Denison, D.R. (1982), “The climate, culture, and effectiveness of work organizations: a study of
organizational behavior and ﬁnancial performance”, Doctoral dissertation, University of
Michigan.

DeLong, D. (1997), “Building the knowledge-based organization: how culture drives knowledge
behaviors”, Working Paper, Ernst & Young’s Center for Business Innovation, Boston, MA.

Edvinsson, L. and Malone, M. (1997), Intellectual Capital, HarperCollins Publishers, New York, NY,

Edvinsson, L. and Sullivan, P. (1996), “Developing a model for managing intellectual capital”,

European Management Journal, Vol. 14 No. 4.

Galbraith, J.R. (1973), Designing Complex Organizations, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

Ginchereau, W., Howell, F. and Mitchell, K. (1997), “Too much information”, InfoWorld, 19 May,

Guerteen, D. (1999), Creating a Knowledge Sharing Culture, available at: www.guerteen.com

Hamel, G. and Prahalad, C.K. (1994), Competing For The Future, Harvard Business School Press,

p. 225.

pp. 72-82.

Boston, MA.

Huseman, R.C. and Goodman, J.P. (1999), Leading with Knowledge: The Nature of Competition in

the 21st Century, Sage, London.

Hylton, A. (2002), The Pivotal Role of the Knowledge Audit, Knowledge Board, 30 August,

available at: www.knowledgeboard.com

IASC (1998), IAS 38, Intangible Assets, IASC Standards.

IFAC (1998), The Measurement and Management of Intellectual Capital : An Introduction,

Financial and Management Accounting Committee IFAC 1998 Study 7.

Iske, P. and Boekhoff, T. (2001), “The value of knowledge doesn’t exist: a framework for valuing
the potential of knowledge”, Knowledge Management Magazine, 26-28 June, Vol. 5 No. 2.

Kannan, G. and Akhilesh, K.B. (2002), “Human capital knowledge value addition: a case study in

info-tech”, Journal of Intellectual Capital Management, Vol. 3 No. 1.

Kaplan, R.S. and Norton, D.P.

(1992), “The balanced scorecard – Measures that drive

performance”, Harvard Business Review, pp. 71-9.

Kaplan, R.S. and Norton, D.P. (1996), The Balanced Scorecard, Harvard Business School Press,

Lam, A. (2000), “Tacit knowledge: organizational learning and innovation”, DRUID working

Lemkin (2000), available at: http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/254502.html

Lev, B. (2000), New Math for a New Economy, available at: www.bayacht.com/resource/business/

Lynn, L.E.

(1998), “Managing intellectual capital: the issues and practice”, Management
Accounting Issues, Paper 16, Management Accounting Practices Handbook, Hamilton,
Society of Management Accountants, Ontario, Canada.

Cambridge, MA.

paper, Aalborg.

busvalue.htm

JIC
5,3

412

McGrath, M.E. (1996), “Stetting the pace in product development”, A Guide To Product & Cycle

Time Excellence, Butterworth & Heinemann, London.

Machlup, F. (1962), The Production and distribution of Knowledge in the United States, Princeton

University Press, NJ.

Mahajan, V., Muller, E. and Bass, F.M. (1990), “New product diffusion models in marketing: a

review and directions for research”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 54 No. 1.

Nielsen, A.P. (1995), Proceedings from the 3. IPS Junior Workshop on the New Organisation,

25-16 October, Copenhagen, IPS working-paper.

Nonaka, I. and Konno, N. (1998), “The concept of ‘Ba’: building foundations for knowledge

creation”, California Management Review, Vol. 40 No. 3.

OECD (1999), OECD Work on Measuring Intangible Investment, Micro Policies for Growth,

OECD, Amsterdam.

Phillips, J.J.

(1997), Return on Investment in Training and Performance Programs, Gulf

Publishing Company, Houston, TX.

Prusak, L. (1998), Working Knowledge: How Organizations Manage What They Know, Harvard

Business School Press, Cambridge, MA.

Quinn, P.A. and Sydney, F. (1996), Managing Professional Intellect : Making the Most the Best,

Harward Business Review, March-April.

Roos, G. and Roos, J. (1997), “Measuring your company’s intellectual performance”, Long Range

Planning, Vol. 30 No. 3, pp. 413-26.

Roth, A. (1995), “Introduction to experimental economics”, in Kajel, J. and Roth, A. (Eds),

Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton University Press, NJ.

Schein, E.H. (1996), “Three cultures of management: the key to organizational learning”, Sloan

Management Review.

Sprotte, K. (2000), K3M, Cegos.

Starbuck, W. (1996), “Unlearning ineffective or obsolete technologies”, International Journal of

Technology Management, Vol. 11, pp. 725-37.

Starssman, P. (1999), “Does knowledge capital explain market book valuations”, available at:

www.starssmann.com (accessed September 1999).

Stewart, T.A. (1995), “Trying to grasp the intangible”, Fortune, 2 October, pp. 157-61.

Stewart, T.A. (1997), Intellectual Capital, Nicholas Brealey, London.

Stewart, T.A. (2001), “Accounting gets radical”, Fortune.

Sveiby, K. (1996), The Knowledge Organisation, available at: www.sveiby.com.au/KOS1.html

Sveiby, K. (1997), The New Organizational Wealth: Managing and Measuring Knowledge Based

Assets, Barret-Kohler, San Francisco, CA.

Sveiby, K. (2001), “A knowledge based theory of the ﬁrm to guide strategy formulation”, Journal

Sveiby, K-E. (1998), What is Knowledge Management?, report, Community Intelligence Labs,

of Intellectual Capital, Nos 2/4.

1 February.

Swanstrom, E. (2001), Knowledge Management Economics Framework, GKEC.

Thompson, J.A. (1967), Organizations in Action, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY.

Ulrich, D.

(1998), “Intellectual Capital ¼ Competence £ Commitment”, Sloan Management

Review, Vol. 39 No. 2, pp. 15-26.

Ulrich, D., Wayne, B. and Arthur, Y. (1989), “Human resource competencies in the 1990’s: an
empirical assessment of what the future holds”, Personnel Administrator, pp. 91-3.
Von Hippel, E. (2001), “Perspective user tool kits for innovation”, Journal of Product Innovation

Intellectual
capital

Management, p. 18.

Quarterly, October.

Watkins, P.N. (2001), “The persistence of learning and acquisition strategies”, Acquisition Review

West, T. (1999), “The information content of economic value added: a comparitive analysis with

earnings cahsﬂow and residual income”, Journal of Economic Literature.

413

Further reading
Myers, P.S.

(Ed.)

Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston.

Wiley, New York, NY.

(1996), Knowledge Management

and Organizational Design,

Swanstrom, E. (2000), Knowledge Management: Modeling and Managing the Knowledge Process,

